🪽 Welcome to Realms!

Introduction: Welcome to Realms!

Are you ready to create the fantasy Character you’ve always imagined? Using a robust set of rules with ultimate creative freedom, you will be able to turn any imagination into creation through the imaginative joy of tabletop roleplaying.

Realms is built around 3 core goals for the player experience:

Freedom in player creativity and customization

Engaging and fluid gameplay

Putting fun first, flavor second, and rules third.

If you give time and energy to the game, trusting the system with your most precious and creative ideas, it promises to reward you with immersive and satisfying Characters built on exactly what you envision, adventuring in a way only the imagination can picture.

With the added layer of freedom in world-building backed by the idea of “The Realms,” the cooperative style of fantasy Table-Top Role Playing Games (TTRPG) gameplay, and the combined creativity of a party of friends, Realms is a rewarding role-play experience for all.

The Players

The Realm Master. Your Realm Master, or “RM,” is the individual who crafts the realms of adventure for you and your party to explore. Their role is to guide the player Characters through the rules of the game, assist with Character creation, and serve as the narrator and storyteller.

The Realm Master has the final say on rules, exceptions to those rules, and what is permitted within their created realms, as well as the interpretation of flavor interactions. Players and the RM should communicate openly about their desires and needs, striving for compromises and agreements that ensure everyone feels heard and that their Characters and the world align with their shared vision.

The goal of the Realm Master should be to create an experience in tandem with the players that allows for challenging experiences or captivating roleplay, but also always aims to be enjoyable. Games are about having fun, after all!

The Players/Party. The individuals who create the Characters of their dreams and roleplay their in-game interactions with the other Characters with whom they team up. Each Character will be a unique combination of inspiration from the realm of adventure your story is set in, and the wonderful ideas and goals in your own mind.

Players should feel comfortable being themselves or playing their Character how they feel. If the type of experience a player wants doesn’t line up with that of others in the party or the RM, they should seek a compromise or find a group that is a better fit for their goals.

The Main Realms Resources

Below you’ll find the various resources provided and/or recommended to help optimize your gaming experience:

The Core Rulebook. This book is designed for ease of navigation and straightforward rules and guide referencing. You’ll find core game mechanics, rules for custom Character creation, a leveling guide, the rules glossary, and guides for developing a Character’s signature Powers and Techniques.

The Realms Codex. The Codex is the master of all lists, offering reference to all the relevant game Skills, Feats, species, and Power and Technique parts, organized into an easy-to-reference cache of information.

The Realm Master’s Guide. This core rulebook will include everything a Realm Master will need to know to be effective in running adventures for their party. It will detail how to build unique Encounters, help players build bastions, and other optional rules, as well as how to create custom monsters, Feats, species, and so on.

Character Sheets. There are different forms of Character sheets, such as the digital Sheet, hosted on the Realms website, including multiple tabs and features such as automatic ability calculations, dropdown menus for Skills and Feats, and other user-friendly tools to streamline gameplay and Character creation. Printable PDF Character Sheets are also available with more straightforward and intuitive layouts for a more down-to-earth approach.

Dice. Realms is a base D20 system. Almost every active Action a Character takes with a chance of failure requires a roll of a D20, modified by bonuses or penalties reflecting the Character's strengths and weaknesses.

In addition to a D20, you'll need the following dice: 1d12, 2d10, 1d8, 1d6, 1d4, and 1d2. For a d2, you can use a coin or any die, treating even numbers as 2 and odd numbers as 1. What these dice are, and understanding dice notation, is explained in Chapter 1: Playing the Game.

While this set covers the essentials, you may find yourself wanting more dice as you play. Feel free to have as many as you'd like! Both physical and digital tools can provide additional dice. If you need more options, try searching for “dice roller” online for a quick resource.

A “Table.” By default, Realms uses a hexagonal or square grid system for Combat or any situation where precise measurement is required, with distance referred to in “spaces.” However, you are free to use any method that suits your group, such as theater of the mind, gridless maps with assigned units for spaces, or measuring distances directly.

Realm Master Screen. Whether using digital or physical tools, the Realms Master may prefer to keep their notes and rolls hidden from players. A screen or other method to conceal these elements can help create secrecy and suspense.

Miniatures. Finally, regardless of whether your game is online or in person, most players will want miniature representations of their Characters for use on the map. If detailed miniatures aren't available, simple alternatives like dice, buttons, coins, or other small objects can suffice.

Using This Book

What you’ll find in this book:

Chapter 1: Playing the Game. This chapter is a comprehensive review of all the core game mechanics.

Chapter 2: Encounters. Where most of the game happens, Skill and Combat Encounters, and movement rules are outlined in this chapter.

Chapter 3: Character Creation. The most exciting part of the game (in our opinion) begins in this chapter, a comprehensive guide for everything you need to create a unique Character.

Chapter 4: Equipment & Armaments. Guide to your Character's adventure items, such as equipment and armor, and how to use them. This chapter also walks Characters through creating custom Armaments.

Chapter 5: Powers & Techniques. A guide for creating your Character’s unique toolset, known as Techniques and Powers.

Appendix A: Rules Glossary. Terms, conditions, definitions, and other rule clarifications for ease of access and quick referencing.

Appendix B: The Realms. A quick guide to The Realms, the multiverse where all Realms games take place.

Each chapter can be referenced by opening the tabs to the top left of the page (or bottom if mobile). Double-click on a chapter heading to see that chapter’s sections.

Legends & Formatting

This section provides a quick guide to the different text formats you’ll encounter throughout this book, and what each of them means:

Capitalized Terms. Certain words are capitalized to show they are official game terms used consistently across all resources. For example, Abilities are the six defining attributes of every player Character.

Italicized Text. Italics indicate a game term that has not yet been formally defined. Sometimes a concept is referenced before its full explanation appears later in the book. For instance, Powers may be mentioned before they are described in detail.

Tables. Tables are used frequently to organize game information. Each table includes labeled columns and rows, and results are typically read by cross-referencing a row with its corresponding column.

Roll Tables. These tables rely on a rolled dice to generate a random result, which can be cross-referenced using the resulting value rolled.

Boxed Text. Different box styles are used to highlight specific types of information:

Broken-Border (Blue) Boxes. Provide clarification or expand upon existing rules.

“Write This Down” Boxes. Prompt you to record something important, such as a Character statistic or creature detail, either on paper or digitally.

Player Tip Boxes (Orange). Contain advice and helpful suggestions. These are not official rules.

Formula Boxes. Display only the relevant formula needed for a calculation.

“Another Way to Play” Boxes. Present optional rules that Realm Masters and players can agree to use at their discretion.

Example Boxes. Often longer, these walk through gameplay scenarios step by step, showing how a specific rule or mechanic functions in practice. Usually accompanied by fictional players and Characters interacting in a scenario.

Using the Codex

The Realms Codex contains multiple lists and columns in a Google Sheet™. The lists are organized into tabs that can be found at the bottom of the codex. The following items are located solely in the codex:

Section 1: Species. This tab contains the game’s base species which are used in Character creation to give your Character a lineage and customized ancestry.

Section 2: Skills. Each of the Skills your Character has the potential to be proficient in are found here. Instinctive and sub-skills are denoted by the columns in their Skills’ same row, as well as the different benefits for Successes or failure used for Skill rolls.

Section 3: Archetype Feats. This list is full of a plethora of Feats that will help define your Character's class, build, or archetype, primarily as it relates to Combat.

Section 4: Characteristic Feats. This list holds the Feats that help define your Character’s nature, personality, and unique talents, primarily as it relates to interacting with the world and its occupants.

Section 5: Items. All of the items along with their properties, values, proficiency costs, benefits, and drawbacks are included in this section.

Section 6: Power & Techniques. This list holds all Powers and Techniques that are pre-made with energy and training point costs, descriptions, and so on ready to be added to a Character sheet or modified to fit your desired effect and flavor.

Appendix A: Power & Technique Parts. Here are each of the Power and Technique parts that can be used to create unique Powers and Techniques with an infinite number of combinations and possibilities for flavor and effect.

Appendix B: Genetic Feats. Feats such as ancestry traits, creature or animal Feats, or any other Feats used to create monsters, animals, or summoned companions.

Builder A: Item Creator. A tool used to create custom weapons and armor easily.

Builder B: Power & Technique Creator. A tool used to create custom Powers and Techniques or a combination of the two with your own flavor and effects.

Most chapters within this book discuss how to use the digital resources available for their chapters, such as the Power & Technique creator’s use is detailed in Chapter 5: Powers & Techniques.

🕹️ Playing the Game

Playing the Game

As a Realm Master and party come together to play a game or “session” of Realms, there are a few key aspects to look for and expect:

Social Interaction. Your player Character will frequently interact with the Characters and creatures of the world. During these interactions, you may need to barter, intimidate, charm, negotiate, and more. These exchanges can either serve as the main focus of an adventure or play a smaller role, depending on your party’s preferences.

Skill Encounters. As you explore and experience the limitless world your Realm Master guides you through, you will often be called upon to test your abilities and use your talents to overcome difficulties. A comprehensive yet simple ruleset makes Skill Encounters an exciting part of the game. Whether you're navigating a rickety bridge, solving a tough riddle, scaling a tall building, outwitting an enemy during a chase, or crossing a vast plane, your Skills will play a critical role.

Combat Encounters. When tensions run high between creatures or Characters and the party—or for other reasons—fighting often becomes inevitable. Specific rules make Combat an exciting part of Realms, requiring dynamic interactions that require teamwork and strategy to achieve victory. Not all battles are about simply defeating the other side; many will involve tricky solutions that the party must devise mid-fight to outwit a challenging situation or opponent.

Downtime. blank

Flavor Rules

Each Power, Technique, Feat, and Character choice is a blank slate, waiting for you to imagine, create, and develop into your perfect vision. The rules and mechanics of Realms are designed as scaffolding to help you build upon to create every aspect of your Character and ideas. You are not confined by the description or name of a Feat, the way a Species is portrayed, or any other predefined aspect of the game. Ultimately, you decide why a Feat works the way it does, what a Power looks like in action, or how your Character uses a Skill.

Feats. You are encouraged to rename Feats when adding them to your Character sheet and to expand their descriptions with additional flavor text that ties them to your Character's story. For example, a Feat called "Blood Frenzy" could be renamed "Panicked and Dangerous," shifting the tone from a blood-crazed advantage to a Character channeling their panic into adrenaline-fueled Action.

Powers. Each Power you possess has no essence until you define it. For example, a sphere of effect that deals fire damage could be a fireball—or perhaps a miniature sun explosion that sears the skin. A Power that deals piercing damage at a range might manifest as a clockwork bee stinging an enemy, a sharp needle of pure energy, or a quickly summoned scorpion that vanishes in a flash.

How your Character uses Powers is entirely up to you. Do they channel their abilities through a Power focus, wave their hands while speaking incantations, wind up a mechanical device, throw a potion bottle, or perhaps unleash the Power from their eyes—or even their belly button?

Techniques. Each Technique part has specific mechanics for how it functions, but like Powers, the appearance and style of each Technique are entirely up to you. For example, you might kick an enemy into the air and headbutt them on the way down, roll under a creature's legs to slash at their ankles as you pass or leap gracefully into the air to unleash a powerful bow shot.

Unlike Powers, Techniques are more flexible in flavor during the moment of use. If a Technique allows you to slam a creature and knock it prone, you might choose to leap onto it from a cliff above or charge at it to send it crashing into a wall. Regardless of how it is described, the Technique’s mechanics remain the same, which allows you to adapt its flavor to suit your Character’s unique style and desired outcome in the moment.

Flavor’s Function. The flavor you choose for your Character and their talents has real effects on both gameplay mechanics and roleplay. For example, if your Character uses ice magic described as emanating from their fingertips, wearing certain gloves might hinder or enhance their Powers, while restraining their hands could reduce their effectiveness. Similarly, if you describe every Technique as involving knee strikes, a broken leg could significantly impact your ability to use those Techniques.

These in-game effects are not rigidly defined, but they reflect the natural strengths and weaknesses of your Character’s abilities and style. Embrace these nuances and enjoy how they shape the story. Avoid designing a Character with impenetrable Powers or uncounterable attacks. Instead, ensure your Character has both strengths and weaknesses that contribute to the group's dynamic without overshadowing other adventurers.

Check with the Realm Master. Before creating your Character or starting a game, communicate with your Realm Master about the genre, lore, and other details of the setting. Make sure your Character’s flavor not only fits the world but fits well within it. If your ideas for flavor are unconventional or might conflict with the setting, discuss them with your Realm Master and even the other players to ensure they integrate smoothly and are enjoyable for everyone.

Sessions and Campaigns

Sessions. You might play a single, straightforward adventure lasting 2–4 hours, or participate in an ongoing adventure with sessions held regularly. Either way, a session is the event where players—the party and Realm Master—come together to play the game for a few hours.

A session typically begins with the Realm Master introducing the adventure or setting, or recapping what happened in the previous session. Sessions usually conclude either at a predetermined time or at a natural stopping point, such as a cliffhanger or the completion of a story arc.

Campaigns. A campaign is a long-form story that unfolds over multiple sessions or “episodes”. Characters in the party typically remain consistent, progressing through levels and interconnected storylines. Campaigns can end at any level and often include multiple story arcs, which together build toward a larger, overarching narrative created by the Realm Master and the players.

Single-Session Adventures.

Dice

Dice are the lifeblood of the story. They introduce random chance and represent a hint of chaos in every encounter, making each roll an exciting part of the game.

Notation. Dice are represented as XdY, where X is the number of dice, and Y is the die size. For example, 3d8 implies rolling three eight-sided dice and summing the results. When rolling just one die, it is written as 1dY or sometimes simply dY or DY (e.g., d10, D20).

1d2. This die can be represented by flipping a coin or rolling any even-numbered die. Simply assign odd numbers as 1 and even numbers as 2.

Increase Die Sizes. Sometimes, a die is increased or decreased by another die size. This means combining dice to form a new die size.

Two of the same die combine into the next largest die.

1d6 + 1d6 = 1d12

1d8 + 1d2 = 1d10

If increasing a die would result in a value beyond 1d12, the total is split into two dice, usually in the most uniform way.

1d12 + 1d4 = 2d8 (since 12 + 4 = 16, which evenly splits into two d8s).

If the total doesn’t split evenly, mix different dice sizes.

1d12 + 1d2 = 1d8 & 1d6

Dice Conversion Table. This table can be referenced for combining dice of different sizes quickly.

First Die

Second Die

Resulting Dice

1d2

1d2

1d4

1d2

1d4

1d6

1d2

1d6

1d8

1d2

1d8

1d10

1d2

1d12

1d8 & 1d6

1d4

1d4

1d8

1d4

1d6

1d10

1d4

1d8

1d12

1d4

1d12

2d8

1d6

1d6

1d12

1d6

1d8

1d6 & 1d8

1d6

1d12

1d8 & 1d10

1d8

1d8

2d8

1d8

1d12

2d10

1d12

1d12

2d12

Percentile Dice - D100. The most common method for rolling 1d100 involves using a pair of ten-sided dice numbered 0–9, often called percentile dice. Before rolling, designate one die as the tens digit and the other as the ones digit. For example, rolling a 6 on the tens die and a 2 on the ones die results in 62. A roll of two 0s (or 10s) represents 100.

Some ten-sided dice are specifically numbered in tens (00, 10, 20, etc.), which helps clearly identify the tens digit. In this case, rolling 70 and 1 produces 71, while rolling 00 and 0 results in 100, 00 and 1 results in 1 and so on.

Round Up

Whenever you get a fraction or decimal as a result of division, round up to the nearest whole number. If other calculations involve a decimal, complete all the calculations first and round up only at the end.

Abilities

Every Character, creature, and monster has six Abilities that define their physical and mental strength, prowess, and capabilities, shaping how they interact with the world:

Strength. Strength governs physical actions like lifting, breaking, throwing, climbing, and stability. It determines your chance to hit and the damage dealt with some melee weapons.

Vitality. Vitality represents resilience and endurance, affecting resistance to damage, toxins, illnesses, and more. It also contributes to your Health (HP) at each level.

Agility. Agility measures speed and reflexes, affecting Evasion (EV) and Speed (SP). It determines your chance to hit and damage dealt with melee or ranged finesse weapons.

Acuity. Acuity reflects mental sharpness, influencing perception, reaction, and aim. It determines your chance to hit and the damage dealt with most ranged weapons.

Intelligence. Intelligence covers knowledge, problem-solving, memory, and knowledge in topics such as history, lore, and language.

Charisma. Charisma governs social skills, including persuasion, intimidation, and emotional intelligence. It also represents your presence, poise, resolve, and confidence.

Abilities are typically represented as values ranging from -3 to 5. In some cases, Abilities can exceed this range, but they can never drop below -5 or rise above 10. The default maximum for a player Character’s Ability is 5.

The D20

Whenever anything is attempted that involves a degree of uncertainty or chance for success, a D20 is used. The D20 serves as a storytelling conduit, creating blunders or magnificent successes by a Character based on the variation in the numbers rolled. When you roll a D20, you are taking an active role in a situation in an attempt to Overcome something.

The general formula for any D20 roll is to roll the D20, then add bonuses and penalties, and compare the total to the Score you are attempting to Overcome. If the total meets or exceeds the Score, you are successful; if it falls below, you are unsuccessful.

D20 Roll Formula

D20 + Bonuses + Penalties = Outcome

Player Tip

Usually, you will share the result of a die roll with the Realm Master, who will then determine and communicate whether you succeeded in Overcoming the challenge. This approach helps maintain the immersion of the experience by keeping the target numbers hidden.

Bonuses. A bonus is any number you add to a roll, usually a D20 roll. Skill bonuses are examples of bonuses.

Penalties. A penalty is any number you subtract from a roll, usually a D20 roll. The Multiple Action Penalty is an example of a penalty.

Natural 20. If you roll a D20 and roll a result of “20” on the die, you have rolled a natural 20. This automatically adds a +2 bonus to the roll.

Natural 1. If you roll a D20 and roll a result of “1” on the die, you have rolled a natural 1. This automatically adds a -2 penalty to the roll.

Determination Die. At the beginning of each session, each Character starts with a Determination Die, as denoted by a small filled-in circle on your Character sheet. While you have this die, you may spend it to re-roll any roll, and all dice included, and choose which result to keep. Once used, the Determination Die is lost.

The Realm Master can award you a Determination Die when you achieve a great feat, excel in roleplay, or accomplish something impressive.

You can have up to three Determination Dice at a time, each tracked the same way, but you lose all of them at the end of the session, so there’s no point in saving them! If the Realm Master awards you a Determination Die, you may choose to give it to another party member instead.

Overcoming Scores

A Score is a numerical representation of a Skill, Ability, Defense, or another attribute used passively or reactively. It can also be a specific number to represent a level of difficulty, known as a Difficulty Score.

Any Bonus in the game that applies to a D20 roll can also be converted into a Score by simply adding 10 to it.

For example, if you have a Stealth Skill Bonus of +5 and attempt to remain unseen, you would actively roll a D20 + 5. However, after your initial attempt, you no longer need to roll, as you are now passively staying hidden using your Stealth Score. This is calculated as: Stealth Score = 10 + Stealth Skill Bonus (5) = 15.

The Bonuses used most commonly for Scores are Defenses, and Skills. Another common Score is Evasion.

Score Formula

10 + Bonus = Score

Overcoming

Whenever a D20 roll is made, and it meets or exceeds the Score it is targeting, it has Overcome that score. If the Score exceeds the roll instead, then the Score has Overcome that roll.

For example, if you roll a D20 and add your Perceive Skill Bonus, attempting to locate a creature using its Stealth Score, the result is compared against the creature’s Score. If your final roll equals 15, and the creature’s Stealth Score is also 15, you Overcome the Score and successfully spot the creature. However, if the creature’s Stealth Score were 16, it would have Overcome your roll, allowing it to remain unseen.

To Roll, or Not to Roll. In general, when deciding between using a Score or a D20 roll, try to have the individual in the active position make the roll. For example, Attack rolls are active D20 rolls made against a Score, such as a Defense Score or Evasion. Other situations where a D20 roll might be used include avoiding a trap or falling rocks, attempting to charm someone, or picking a lock.

In cases where the environment is acting upon a creature, such as a weak floorboard collapsing underfoot, the creature always takes the active role and makes a D20 roll in response.

Difficulty Scores. A Difficulty Score (DS) represents the relative challenge of a task. The higher the DS, the harder it is to succeed. Generally, the difficulty of a task corresponds to its DS as follows.

Difficulty Score

Challenge

Difficulty Score

Challenge

0-4

Trivial

20-24

Formidable

5-9

Easy

25-29

Strenuous

10-14

Moderate

30-34

Overwhelming

15-19

Difficult

35-40

Insurmountable

Successes. Successes are determined by how a D20 roll result compares to a target Score, with exceeding or meeting the score, as well as every 5 points above representing one Success. Similarly, Failures are determined by how much a roll falls short of the target Score, with falling short, as well as every 5 points below representing one Failure.

For instance, if you were rolling Sleight of Hand against a Difficulty Score of 12 and obtained a 17, you’d have obtained 2 Successes, as you not only exceeded the Score, supplying one Success, but you did so by 5, granting an additional Success.

More Successes indicate superior performance, leading to better outcomes, while greater Failures reflect more significant shortcomings, potentially resulting in worse consequences.

Critical & Partial Success & Failure

When a D20 roll matches or falls short of a target Score by 1 point, it is considered a Partial Success or Partial Failure, respectively.

Partial Success. Meeting a Score by 1 achieves the desired outcome but includes a small negative consequence. For example, you might correctly recall information with a History roll but mix up some names or add details that weren’t originally present.

Partial Failure. Falling short of a Score by 1 fails to achieve the desired outcome but includes a small positive consequence. For instance, you might fail to open a door with pure Strength but make it easier for the next person to do so.

Realm Masters should feel free to classify other rolls as Partial Successes or Failures based on context, even if the roll exceeds or falls short of the Score by more than 1.

Critical Success and Failure. A critical success occurs when a D20 roll achieves 3 or more Successes (+10) above the target Score, while a critical failure happens when the roll falls 3 or more Failures (-10) below the target Score. Critical outcomes always lead to significantly better or worse results than expected.

Each Skill in the Realms Codex includes defined positive outcomes for each Success, as well as specific effects for critical outcomes. Similarly, attack rolls provide benefits based on critical success. Beyond these written effects, Realm Masters are encouraged to create their own enhanced outcomes for Successes or Failures, including critical results.

These outcomes can be improvised or predetermined, but Realm Masters should document the outcomes they assign to each Success to ensure consistency across sessions and rulings.

Defenses

The ability to Overcome negative circumstances and consequences is called a Defense. Each Ability has a corresponding Defense used to withstand harmful effects or break free from those already affecting you.

Might (Strength). Resist being moved by force, grappled, or restrained, and helps to maintain a firm grip.

Fortitude (Vitality). Resist poisons, environmental effects, and fend off diseases.

Reflexes (Agility). Dodge hazards, avoid being toppled, and maneuver to escape danger.

Discernment (Acuity). Detect illusions, incoming attacks, trickery (e.g., sleight of hand or mimicry), and disguises.

Mental Fortitude (Intelligence). Overcome mind-altering effects, mind-reading, cognitive manipulation, and logical challenges.

Resolve (Charisma). Overcome charm, resist temptations, and avoid fear, intimidation, or possession.

Defense Bonus. To break free from an ongoing effect, you usually make a D20 roll + Defense Bonus that meets or exceeds the effect's Potency or Difficulty Score to end it. By default, a defense Bonus is equal to the related Defenses’ Ability. By using Skill Points (see Skills) and Feats, you can increase this value.

Defense Bonus

Ability + Skill Point Increases = Bonus

Defense Score. When an effect targets one of your defenses, the initiator usually makes a D20 roll to Overcome it, meeting or exceeding the relevant Defense Score, to succeed.

Defense Score

10 + Defense Bonus = Score

Evasion (EV). How well you can avoid being hit by attacks. This is the Score targeted by attacks unless otherwise specified. Unlike other Defenses, Evasion is always a passive Score and is never rolled with a D20. It is calculated simply as Agility + 10.

Evasion is not considered a "Defense" in the same way as other defenses, as it has no associated "Bonus" and cannot be increased with Skill Points (see "Skills"). Feats, powers, and so on that reference “Defenses” do not reference Evasion.

Evasion Score Formula

10 + Agility = Evasion

Proficiency

Proficiency means possessing an understanding of the details and nuances of something, such as maintaining an item, maneuvering in armor, using the appropriate tools for your skillset, or wielding a weapon effectively. Proficiency in your Archetype also grants Bonuses to some Scores, D20 rolls, and other facets of your Archetype, enabling you to fully access its potential.

Unproficient. When you lack proficiency with something, your understanding of related tasks is limited. This often results in poorer performance or an inability to perform the task entirely.

In most cases, where you can still attempt a task without proficiency, you add only half of the related Ability to D20 rolls and Scores, and no other Bonuses. If the Ability is negative, you instead double the negative Ability and add it to the D20 rolls and Scores.

Specific Proficiencies. Proficiency requirements and rulings are detailed in their respective sections: Skill proficiency is covered in Skills, Archetype Proficiency (including Martial and Power Proficiency) is explained in Chapter 2: Character Creation, and Weapon and Armor proficiency is addressed in Chapter 4: Items and Equipment.

Skills

Skills represent your Character's trained expertise and natural talents. Skills are divided into Base Skills and Sub-skills.

Each Skill ties to a specific Ability or Abilities from which you’d choose one to use for that Skill. Proficiency in a Skill allows you to use it with greater effectiveness, while a lack of proficiency limits your capabilities.

All Skills can be found in the first section of the Realms Codex, including Skill descriptions and utilities, different effects based on Successes, the Abilities tied to each Skill, and Instinctive classifications.

Base Skills vs. Sub-Skills. A “Base” Skill refers to any Skill that does not build upon another Skill, such as Sleight of Hand, Medicine, and so on. Sub-Skills are Skills that derive from a base Skill but represent more specific applications—for example, Lockpicking under Sleight of Hand or Triage under Medicine. You cannot gain proficiency in a Sub-Skill until you have first gained proficiency in its corresponding base Skill.

Skill Rolls. When attempting to Overcome a situation in which a Skill can be utilized, or when prompted by the Realm Master to do so, you make a Skill Roll. The basic formula when rolling with a Proficient Skill is D20 + Skill Bonus.

Skill Roll Formula

D20 + Skill Bonus = Total

Skill Bonus. The Bonus you apply to all Skill Scores and D20 Skill Rolls is called the Skill Bonus. The basic formula for Skill Bonus is the relevant Ability + Skill Value. The Skill Value is the number of Skill Points allocated to a Skill after gaining proficiency.

Base Skill Bonus Formula

Relevant Ability + Skill Value = Skill Bonus

Sub-Skill Bonus. Sub-Skills are specialized Skills that build upon the knowledge and experience of broader Skills. For example, Lockpicking is a Sub-Skill of Sleight of Hand, and Search is a Sub-Skill of Perceive.

The bonus applied to Sub-Skill Scores and D20 Sub-Skill Rolls is called the Sub-Skill Bonus and functions similarly to a Base Skill Bonus. The basic formula for calculating a Sub-Skill Bonus is relevant Ability + Base Skill Value + Sub-Skill Value

The Sub-Skill Value equals the total number of Skill Points allocated to a Sub-Skill, including the point spent to gain proficiency in that Sub-Skill. This distinguishes Sub-Skills from Base Skills, which do not include the point spent to gain proficiency in their Skill Value.

Sub-Skill Bonus Formula

Relevant Sub-Skill Ability + Sub-Skill Value + Base Skill Value = Sub-Skill Bonus

Unproficient Skill Rolls

Characters often lack proficiency in all Skills and will therefore need to attempt tasks that are new or unfamiliar to them. These are considered unproficient Skill rolls. When determining what it means to be unproficient with a particular Skill or Sub-Skill, refer to the Skill’s description and consider what a Character could reasonably accomplish without formal knowledge or training.

For example, attempting the Cook Sub-Skill is a reasonable action for most Characters, even without proficiency, while attempting Leatherworking or History may require specialized knowledge and training to justify a roll. Realm Masters are encouraged to use context and common sense when deciding what actions are practical for an unproficient Character to attempt—and are further encouraged to find ways for Characters to try something, rather than reasons they can’t.

Unproficient Skills. The formula for the Unproficient Skill Bonus is simply the Relevant Ability divided in half. If this Ability is negative, you instead double the negative Ability. The same is true for rolling Sub-Skills without the Base Skill’s proficiency.

Unproficient Skill Bonus Formula

½ Relevant Ability or x 2 (if negative) = Unproficient Skill Bonus

Unproficient Sub-Skills. When rolling with a Sub-Skill you aren’t proficient with, you simply use the base Skill Value + Relevant Sub-Skill Ability.

If you aren’t proficient with the base Skill, you simply roll the Sub-Skill the same way you’d roll an unproficient Skill as described above

Unproficient Sub-Skill Bonus Formula

Relevant Sub-Skill Ability + Base Skill Value = Sub-Skill Bonus

Skill Points & Gaining Proficiency

At your first level and each level after, you gain Skill Points, which you can use for three things:

Acquiring Proficiency with Skills. Spending one Skill Point on a Skill or Sub-Skill grants proficiency with that Skill. Gaining proficiency with a Sub-Skill also increases its Skill Value by 1.

Increasing Skill Values. After acquiring proficiency with a Skill, you can spend Skill Points to increase the Skill Value in a one-to-one ratio up to the Skill Cap Value.

Increasing Skill Value Caps. The default maximum for all Base Skill and Sub-Skill Values is 3; this is the Skill Value Cap. This Cap can be increased by 1 for Base Skills by spending 2 Skill Points, and 1 for Sub-Skills by spending 1 Skill Point. This can be done at any time. The Skill Points spent increase the Skill Value Cap, but not the Skill Value itself.

Increasing Defenses: You can spend two Skill Points to increase a Defense Bonus by one, up to a maximum increased Defense Bonus equal to your Level. (Defense Bonuses can be more than your level, but cannot be increased to more than your level with Skill Points.) Evasion cannot be increased with Skill Points.

You may spend Skill Points whenever you desire, and may also save them between levels. Once a Skill Point is spent, it cannot be recovered.

Using Different Base & Sub-Skills & Abilities

You may sometimes encounter a situation where a certain Skill is called for, but it makes more sense to use a different Ability. For example, when tying a knot using Sleight of Hand, Intelligence might be more appropriate than Agility to recall how to tie the knot. In such cases, the Realm Master may allow or even require you to use the alternate Ability. The calculation change is simple: New Ability + Skill Value = Skill Bonus.

Similarly, you might find that using a different Base or Sub-skill makes more sense. For instance, when searching for ingredients for a potion, using Nature as the base Skill instead of Perceive could be more appropriate. This adjustment may be at the Realm Master’s discretion or something you suggest yourself. The calculation follows the same logic: Ability + Sub-skill Value + New Base Skill Value = New Sub-skill Bonus.

Helping

When you wish to assist a creature attempting a Skill Roll, you may do so, provided it is logical for you to help in the given context and you have proficiency with the related Skill. To assist, describe how you intend to help, then, as directed by the RM, roll the related Skill's Help Die. Add the result to the assisted creature’s Skill roll Total.

Multiple creatures may assist with a single Skill Roll, each rolling their respective Help Die and contributing to the total, as long as the context allows for this type of team assistance.

Help Die. The Help Die is the die you roll when assisting a creature with a Skill roll. The type of die is determined by your Skill Bonus, rounded up to the nearest even number. For example:

If your Skill Bonus was +1, you’d roll 1d2.

If your Skill Bonus was +3, you’d roll 1d4.

If your Skill Bonus is +4, you’d still roll 1d4, and so on.

The largest die type a Help Die can be is 1d12.

Vision & Obscurity

Vision. Creatures perceive the world in various ways, such as sight, smell, touch, and even taste, but the most common of these is vision. By default, all creatures possess Basic Vision, relying on light and eyes to perceive their surroundings in a 90-degree field of view in front of them. Other vision types include:

Darkvision – Ignores obscurity caused by darkness within a certain range but only allows sight in shades of gray. It may be achieved through light-sensitive eyes, supernatural enhancements, or other means.

Blindsense – Provides full, colorless perception of surroundings within a certain range. This often includes sonar, echolocation, or supernatural abilities that do not rely on traditional eyesight.

Lifesense – Grants an acute awareness of living things within a certain range, often based on sensing thermal activity, biological scents, or other life-detecting methods.

Earthsense – Provides full, colorless perception of surroundings within a certain range, but only while in contact with an earthen material, and only of surroundings also in contact with the same earthen material.

Liquidsense – Provides full, colorless perception of surroundings within a certain range, but only through the medium and while in contact with liquid.

Obscurity

You are considered Obscured to a target creature or group of creatures when you are partially or completely out of their line of sight or otherwise visibility. Obscurity can occur at four levels: Completely Obscured, Heavily Obscured, Moderately Obscured, and Lightly Obscured.

Being Obscured can increase your chances of success with certain Skills, such as Stealth or Hide, and reduce the likelihood of being hit by an attack. For every level of Obscurity, attackers suffer a -1 penalty to their attack rolls against you. Additionally, Obscurity often implies bonuses or penalties of ±1 per level to rolls or Scores that benefit from or are hindered by being obscured. Completely obscured targets, for instance, are typically untargetable.

Levels of Obscurity.

Completely Obscured (+4 or -4). The target is entirely out of sight, such as being behind a solid object, fully inside another object, or otherwise invisible.

Heavily Obscured (+3 or -3). The target is almost entirely hidden, with very little visible, such as being mostly behind an obstacle or heavily shrouded by an environmental effect.

Moderately Obscured (+2 or -2). The target is partially hidden, with about half of its body obscured by an obstacle or environmental effect.

Lightly Obscured (+1 or -1). Less than half of the target is hidden, but there is still enough cover to provide minor concealment.

When describing the cause of Obscurity, use the same terminology to indicate its degree of Obscurity, such as light fog, moderate darkness, or heavy foliage. This language will make it easily understood by all players the level of Obscurity an area has.

Obscurity Bonuses. Obscurity should never result in redundant bonuses or penalties for multiple parties involved. For example, if a Character is in darkness and is targeted by an attack, the attack might receive a -2 penalty for moderate darkness. However, also granting the Character a +2 bonus to Evasion would be redundant, as the adjustment has already been applied to the attacker. The same applies to a Character hiding with a +2 Bonus from Obscurity, and a creature looking for them with a -2 penalty to perceive.

In most instances, apply Obscurity bonuses to the one making a D20 roll, and not the passive party.

Common Causes of Obscurity. Obscurity can result from various factors, including:

Environmental Effects. Fog, mist, darkness, smoke, or shadows.

Cover. Walls, terrain, foliage, or objects.

Creature Size. The size of the creature relative to the cover (e.g., a 1-meter-high wall provides moderate cover for a 2-meter-tall creature).

Distance-Based Obscurity. As an optional rule, distance may also obscure a target:

Far Distance (65+ spaces). The target is heavily Obscured, or increases its Obscurity level by 3.

Moderate Distance (33-64 spaces). The target is moderately Obscured, or increases its Obscurity level by 2.

Close Distance (32 spaces). The target is lightly Obscured, or increases its Obscurity level by 1.

Complete Obscurity due to distance is typically caused by other factors, such as terrain blocking the line of sight or the target being entirely out of view.

Travel

Most of the time spent traveling will involve walking on familiar or perhaps unknown paths, with little action occurring. For this reason, travel should be broken up into specific events or milestones. Not every night will be a perfect opportunity for roleplay, nor will every day offer peak adventuring experiences—but a few of them can! It’s important to distribute social interactions, Encounters, and other engaging moments throughout the journey, focusing on the elements that make adventures truly great. You will learn more about these events in Chapter 2: Encounters.

Travel should not just be a part of an adventure—it could very well be the entire adventure! Perhaps after an especially difficult Encounter, a Character is forced off the path, only to later reunite after discovering hidden ruins that could hold clues or progression for the story.

Encounters. Skill Encounters, Combat Encounters, and social interactions should all be woven throughout travel as the events and milestones that make the journey exciting. Aim for 1 of these Encounters on a short trip, 3 for a moderate one, and 5-7 on a longer journey.

Travel Pace. The average party can travel at a pace of 8 kilometers per day. Traveling at a fast pace allows you to cover 10 kilometers per day, but at the end of each day at this pace, you must make a DS 10 Fortitude roll or gain a level of Exhaustion, which cannot be removed until after two Full Recoveries. The DS increases by 2 for each additional day spent traveling at this pace. A day of traveling implies that you spend 8 hours traveling, with the remainder of the day spent recovering and taking necessary breaks to set up camp, gather supplies, and attend to other tasks.

Vehicle Travel. Traveling with a vehicle usually incurs cost and can have varying speeds on land, water, and air. However, generally speaking, using a vehicle such as a horse-drawn carriage or boat to travel will not incur the exhaustion penalty associated with fast-paced travel.

Rest & Recovery

As your Characters navigate the world, they’ll inevitably face challenges, get hurt, and expend energy and resources. To stay at their best, Characters need at least 6–8 hours of sleep and around 2 hours of downtime each day. Without this essential rest, they risk exhaustion and may be unable to fully recover until they meet these basic needs.

The two main resources that Recovery restores are Health and Energy.

Health. This represents a creature's health and well-being, as well as their ability to endure damage and keep pushing forward, avoiding death.

Energy. This is the main resource used by all Characters to perform extraordinary acts, typically in the form of Powers and Techniques as outlined in Chapter 5: Powers & Techniques. This Energy can be represented in various ways, such as a Paladin's Faith, a Wizard's Mana, a Robot's Charge, a Fighter's Stamina, or an Alchemist's Supply. Energy represents the resource you expend to perform your Powers and/or Techniques as a Character.

Feat Uses. Some Feats have a number of uses that they regain each Partial or Full Recovery, as outlined in Chapter 3: Character Creation.

Requirements. To benefit from recoveries, a Character requires adequate nutrition and hydration for their size and species. Characters must have reasonably temperate conditions to rest, including bedding if necessary. Characters must doff armor to sleep properly.

Partial Recovery. You can choose to take two hours to rejuvenate, rest, prepare, and recover. This allows you to regain one fourth of both your maximum Energy and Health. Alternatively, you can choose to regain one-half of one of your maximum Health or Energy instead. You may choose to recover for two, four, or six hours, with each additional two-hour block providing the same benefit as the first.

Partial Recovery also causes some temporary effects on creatures to wear off. If any portion of Partial Recovery is interrupted, you do not gain the benefits of the interrupted time. For Recovery Periods longer than two hours, you only benefit from each two-hour Partial Recovery period completed before the interruption, unless you resume the Recovery within 10 minutes of the interruption.

Full Recovery. You may choose to take a Full Recovery, which lasts between eight and ten hours. This will fully restore your Energy and Health and remove most temporary effects. During this time, you may also engage in activities like investigating the area, repairing clothing, practicing Powers or Techniques, and keeping watch, as long as all Characters get at least eight hours of downtime, including sleep if needed.

If you choose to forgo a full recovery or cannot achieve an uninterrupted full recovery within a 24-hour period, your Character's maximum Energy and Health are reduced by one-fourth each. These values cannot recover above these reduced levels until a full recovery is completed. This effect accumulates for each 24-hour period without a Full Recovery, to a minimum of 1 Energy and 1 Health per Character.

Exhaustion

After entering the Dying condition and later becoming stabilized, resurrected, or revived, you gain the Exhaustion Condition. Exhaustion can also be acquired through other means, typically when pushing yourself beyond normal limits. It may be imposed upon you or voluntarily taken through various Feats, Traits, Powers, or Techniques.

For each level of Exhaustion, reduce all Bonuses and Evasion by an amount equal to that level. Additionally, for every 2 levels of Exhaustion (starting at level 2), your Speed is reduced by 1 space, to a minimum of 1. This affects all Scores calculated using Bonuses as well.

You can recover from Exhaustion incrementally; for each Full recovery, reduce your Exhaustion level by 1. If your Exhaustion level ever exceeds 10, your Character dies (see “Death and Dying” in Chapter 2: Encounters).

Hazards, Companions, & Other Mechanics

This section reviews the different hazards in Realms, how Companions work, and other mechanics.

Hazards

Suffocation. Characters usually need to breathe air, water, or another substance. When deprived of such a substance, they must hold their breath or begin suffocating.

Characters can hold their breath for a number of minutes equal to their Vitality, with a minimum of 30 seconds or 3 rounds. After which, Characters take 1d12 irreducible damage each round at the beginning of their turn until they can breathe.

Falling. When you fall, you take 1d4 bludgeoning damage for every 200 kilograms you weigh, per 2 spaces fallen (up to a maximum of 800 kilograms for 4d4 damage every 2 spaces). Creatures under 200kgs still take 1d4 fall damage as normal (weight rounds up to the nearest 200kgs). Roll Reflex (DS 10 + 1 for every 2 spaces fallen), if you succeed, you take half damage; if you fail, you take full damage and are knocked prone. If you land on another creature, it may attempt a Reflex roll (Same DS) to avoid being hit by you, splitting the damage between both you and the creature if it fails, and both you and the creature are knocked prone. Damage reduction effects do not reduce fall damage.

Your falling speed is 30 spaces, or 45 meters, per round.

Companions

Characters can have Companions; creatures with whom they share a connection and who are typically loyal to them. Companions could be summoned, tamed, trained, hired, or bought and could take many forms, such as sentient humanoids, constructs, swarms of bugs, or tamed beasts. There are no restrictions on the type of creature that can serve as a Companion, but the maximum level of a Companion is limited to half the Character’s level.

During Encounters, Companions can assist in various ways, including making attacks, using powers, performing skill rolls, and more as outlined in Chapter 2: Encounters.

Obtaining Companions. Companions can be obtained through various means, including specific feats, powers, or the downtime Bonding rules in Chapter 4: Equipment, Crafting & Downtime. Since Companions can take any form that fits the context, players are encouraged to choose creatures from the Realms Codex, or design or modify them using the Creature Creator.

Number of Companions. Characters can have as many Companions as they wish, but the effectiveness of a large group tends to diminish exponentially. To simplify mechanics, a Companion can be flavored as a "swarm" or group of creatures while still counting as a single entity.

Companion Equipment. Companions can use some equipment if their anatomy allows, but they must gain proficiency using training points or training as normal.

Companion Progression. Companions are creatures just like characters, with levels, feats, powers, weapons, and so on. A permanent Companion who consistently adventures with you gains levels by gaining ¼ of the experience your Character gains, and leveling as normal. This does not reduce the experience you gain.

You can also train Companions by spending time, resources, and Training Points as outlined in Chapter 4: Equipment, Crafting, & Downtime.

For more information on choosing or creating your own Companions, see Chapter 5: Powers & Techniques.

⚔️ Encounters

Encounters

Encounters are where the game truly comes to life. This is where most of the rolling, mechanics, Feats, and other aspects of the game come into play. Whether engaging in Combat or using Skills, Encounters are the moments that define your Character’s journey and determine the outcome of their actions. They are often challenging and represent the parts of the adventure that aren’t for the faint of heart—only true adventurers like you could face them.

Skill Encounters

In your adventures, you'll encounter challenges that require creativity and teamwork to succeed. Some obstacles might be straightforward—haggling with a merchant for a better price, requiring a Persuade Skill roll. Others may be more intense, like a high-speed chase through crowded streets, unlocking a door before a guard returns, or escaping a labyrinth of traps and illusions.

Though not always the best fit for all situations, Skill Encounters can provide an Encounter-like structure that allows each player to get involved in Overcoming a challenging situation. These Skill Encounters involve the whole party working together toward a common goal, each Character contributing with their unique Skills and resources.

How Skill Encounters Work. Each player describes their plan of Action to contribute to the Encounter. This could range from physical efforts like lifting debris to strategic approaches like devising a pulley system. Players then roll the Skill, Defense, or Ability most relevant to their action. The outcome determines whether they contribute to success or set the group back.

Determining Success

Successes. Each Skill Encounter requires a specific number of Successes across all Skill Rolls to be Overcome. Typically, this number equals the total number of Characters participating plus one, for a moderately difficult challenge. The total number of Successes each Character obtains on their Skill Roll during the Skill Encounter are added together and compared against the encounters required number of Successes.

Failures. Using the same logic, all Failures from Skill rolls are similarly counted agains the number of Successes, with each Failure removing a Success, or adding a Failure if there are no Successes to remove.

The Realm Master may designate more favorable outcomes depending on how many Successes are achieved over the required amount or designate more dire consequences for each Failure below the required amount. Some situations carry inherently more risk, while others may have no worse consequence for failure than some wasted time.

Type of Skill Rolls. Any Skill should be a viable option to overcome an Encounter provided the reasoning is good enough by the player for why it should help. However, some Skills should be naturally more effective for certain Encounters. For instance, removing a fallen tree might favor Strength and Vitality Skill rolls, with Intelligence or Acuity Skill rolls as a close second used for helping devise an efficient plan. Charisma-based Skill rolls could be used to motivate others but might be less effective and thus more challenging to succeed within this context. Specific Skills like Athletics or Nature might offer even higher chances for success, scaled relative to the Abilities they use.

Bonuses. The Realm Master may grant Bonuses to Skill Rolls depending on their utility in the Encounter. Using the fallen tree example:

Strength and Vitality Skills: +2 Bonus

Intelligence and Acuity Skills: +1 Bonus

Charisma Skills: No Bonus

Specific Skills (e.g., Woodworking +4 Bonus or Nature +3 Bonus)

A 1–3 difference between each Bonus is typically sufficient to highlight which Skills are most effective while keeping all attempts viable. Encounter-Specific Skills should generally have higher Bonuses. For example, as noted above, Woodworking might have a Bonus that is 2 points higher than Strength- and Vitality-based Skills in general.

Using Resources. During a Skill Encounter, a Character may want to boost their chances of Success by using Powers, resources, or supplies. Sometimes, a Power or resource directly explains how it helps in a Skill Encounter,like a Power or Toolset that gives a Bonus to certain Skill rolls. Other times, the exact numerical Bonus from a creative solution, such as using a Power or a piece of Equipment, isn’t so obvious.

In those cases, use the table below to assign Bonuses based on the estimated Rarity of the Equipment or the amount of Energy the Power or even Technique would cost. Innate Powers can still apply if they’re situational enough to make sense for that particular Skill Encounter.

As a general rule, Powers and Techniques grant a +1 Bonus for every 5 Energy they cost, or would cost in the case of Innate Powers.

Bonus

Rarity

Energy

+0

-

-

+1

Common

5-9

+2

-

10-14

+3

Uncommon

15-19

+4

-

20-24

+5

Rare

25-29

+6

-

30-34

+7

Legendary

35-39

+8

-

40-44

+9

Mythic

45-49

+10

50-54

+11

Ascended

55-59

Using a resource to aid in a Skill Encounter still requires a relevant Skill Roll for which the resource would be aiding. The Character using the resource can simply grant this Bonus to another Character’s Skill roll instead if they desire or it makes more sense for the situation.

The Order of Skill Encounters

Turn Order. There doesn’t need to be a designated turn order in Skill Encounters, instead players can discuss amongst themselves in which order they’d prefer to go, or decide who will go next after each turn. Either way, players take turns describing their desired Actions and making Rolls. A player can:

Roll to achieve Successes.

Help another player achieve Successes, as outlined in Chapter 1: Playing the Game - Skills.

Timing. Depending on the Skill Encounter players could be performing their Action over the course of seconds, minutes, hours, or even days. In these cases a Skill roll represents the average performance of a Character over the course of that entire time period. If the timeframe for a Skill Encounter seems too long for a single Skill Encounter, you can separate it into multiple Skill Encounters in a Sequence instead.

Some Skill Encounters may be inherently more time-sensitive, such as a chase or quickly unlocking a door before being seen. In these cases, the Realm Master may call for the players to roll for initiative to determine their turn order as outlined in “Combat Encounters” below, usually using Acuity or the Percieve Skill. Combat-Skill Encounters, and other types of Skill encouters, are outlined below in “Different Skill Encounters”

Sequencing. In some scenarios, you may encounter multiple Skill Encounters in succession. For example, sneaking into a keep might involve first finding a way inside, then avoiding detection while moving closer to the goal, and finally accomplishing the objective. Successes or Failures from earlier encounters may carry over to subsequent ones, potentially influencing the Successes required or difficulty ahead.

Carrying over Successes from previous Encounters in a sequence can be flavored in many ways, but it can also be presented simply as a favorable outcome or ‘luck’ carried over from earlier events.

In some situations gaining a number of Successes or Failures on a early Skill Encounter can influence the outcome of future Skill Encounters by granting a +1 to the next Skill Entounter Rolls in the sequence for each success in the first.

Resolving Skill Encounters

Once all players have taken their turns, the Realm Master narrates the outcome, combining the party's descriptions with the results of their rolls. Whether the group succeeds or faces setbacks, the resolution should feel dynamic, reflect the Characters' intentions, and be grounded in their performance.

Holding Your Skill Roll. A player may choose to hold their Skill roll until after the outcome of the Skill Encounter is determined. These held Skill rolls cannot contribute to the overall success or failure of the encounter but are used solely to mitigate potential negative consequences from a failure.

For example, if the group is attempting to cross a crevasse, a Character might prepare an Athletics Skill roll to assist someone if the encounter fails. If the prepared roll adds enough successes to shift the consequences to match those of a success (e.g., avoiding a fall), it mitigates the negative outcome. However, it does not change the overall outcome of the encounter itself from a failure to a success—only the consequences of the failure.

Prepared Skill Rolls cannot worsen outcomes or increase failures. They can only reduce or nullify negative consequences if sufficient Successes are added.

Skill Encounter Example. In this scene, a party of adventurers must navigate a dangerous river. The Realm Master decides to reveal the Difficulty Scores and describe the outcomes as events unfold. However, your Realm Master may choose instead to keep the Difficulty Scores hidden or narrate the entire sequence of events only after everyone has acted.

Four adventurers—Kadin, Isolde, Rhea, and Lyric—emerge from the dense jungle to find themselves at the edge of a raging river. The air is thick with mist from the thundering rapids below, and a precarious rope bridge stretches across, swaying with each gust of wind. Their goal lies on the other side, but the journey across promises to be as perilous as the river itself.

Realm Master (Rita): After hours of travel through dense jungle, you arrive at the banks of a swift, raging river. A rope bridge stretches across, swaying precariously in the wind. Some of the planks are missing, and others creak ominously under the strain of the river’s spray. The goal is clear: the whole party needs to cross. However, this bridge might not hold up without some effort.

Eli (playing Kadin): Kadin steps forward and inspects the bridge. He wants to test its integrity and figure out how we can cross safely.

Nia (playing Isolde): Isolde sees Kadin’s hesitation and steps up. She’ll try to encourage everyone, keeping morale up to help us stay calm and focused.

Rita: All right, this will be a Skill Encounter. To successfully cross the river, you’ll need 3 Successes as a group.

Rita (to Eli): Kadin is inspecting the bridge. What Skill are you Rolling?

Eli: I’ll roll Appraise. He’s looking for weak points or a way to secure the bridge better.

Rita: Sounds good! The Difficulty Score (DS) for this encounter is 12, but Acuity Skills get a +1 Bonus. Go ahead.

Eli (rolling a D20): I rolled a 15! With my Bonuses, that’s 19.

Rita: That’s a success, and a solid one! Kadin identifies two key weak points in the bridge. With some quick adjustments or careful footwork, it should hold for the crossing. That’s two Successes.

Rita (to Nia): Isolde, you’re keeping everyone motivated?

Nia: Yes, I’ll use my Charisma to boost morale. I think Motivate applies here—reminding everyone we’ve faced worse!

Rita: Motivate works, but this is a tricky situation. Let’s see how you do.

Nia (rolling): Hmm, an 6. Even with my Bonus, it’s only 11.

Rita: That’s a close miss. Isolde’s words are inspiring, but the roar of the river drowns her out a bit. That’s one Failure, reducing your Success count to one.

Rita (to Alex, playing Rhea): Rhea, what’s your move?

Alex: I’ll use Sleight of Hand to secure the bridge where Kadin pointed out the weak spots. I have some rope and tools in my kit to make it safer.

Rita: Great! Sleight of Hand is especially effective here, you gain a +3 Bonus.

Alex (rolling): Yes! A 12. With my Sleight of Hand Bonus, and that +3, it’s a 19.

Rita: Another two Successes! With Rhea’s quick work reinforcing the bridge, it looks much sturdier. With teamwork and clever thinking, the party crosses the river safely. The bridge groans under the weight but holds strong. Beyond the river, the jungle stretches onward. Well done, everyone!

Different Skill Encounters

The basic 'Skill Encounter' was outlined above, but there are various other forms, each with unique mechanics, while still adhering to the general 'Skill Encounter' format.

Combat-Skill Encounters

In tense situations, adventurers often need to address multiple challenges at once. For example, they might have to defend and repair a breaking dam during a goblin attack, search for the source of a curse while fending off enspelled creatures, or protect each other from poisonous mists while battling toxic mushroom monsters. These situations are Combat-Skill Encounters, taking place within a Combat initiative order, where each turn Characters can choose to use the Skill Encounter Action and other combat actions to address the encounter’s challenges.

Skill Encounter Action. As outlined in the Combat Encounter section of this chapter, the Skill Encounter Action is used to make a Skill Roll as part of a designated Skill Encounter. Although this action often involves interacting with elements of the environment and includes an Ability Roll, it does not count as an Ability Roll action or an Interaction.

Countdowns & Competitive Successes

Some Skill Encounters can ebb and flow with momentum, with different forces pushing toward either success or failure. Instead of working toward a fixed number of total successes, these encounters may involve a Countdown to Failure—a mechanic that can be stalled or reversed using Skill Rolls or Skill Encounter Actions, whether during rounds of initiative-based combat or outside of it.

Alternatively, Skill Encounters may involve opposing forces-such as enemies actively working to increase the number of failures while the Characters strive to accumulate successes. For example, if goblins are attacking a dam, the encounter might begin with the dam at “0 out of 3 successes.” The heroes’ goal would be to restore the dam to full functionality by reaching 3 Successes, while the goblins work to drive it to -3 (or 3 accumulated Failures), which would result in the dam’s destruction.

Consequences During Skill Encounters. Rather than resolving with a single pass/fail outcome at the end, these Skill Encounters may include active consequences that trigger based on the current success or Failure state. For instance, if the dam reaches 1 Failure, all creatures downstream may need to roll Reflex against the encounter’s Difficulty Score or become Prone due to surging water. This consequence might lessen or disappear as the party gains Successes—or worsen if Failures accumulate further.

Travel. Travel is often structured as a sequence of Skill Encounters, which may be separated or replaced by Combat Encounters or Social Interaction. These Encounters typically cover three or more key events occurring between destinations, with the outcomes determining how efficiently and successfully the party completes the journey.

Competitive Encounters. Similar to Combat, a Skill Encounter may involve competing against an opposing side. This can involve having an alternating turn-order, or could simply be done as one side making Rolls and comparing to the Rolls of the other. In these cases, simply assign Bonuses instead of Difficulty Scores to each Skill roll based on what it is and how effective it is in the given situation. Take the average between all rolls on each side, and compare them. The higher is the winner and thus succeeds, but there can also be ties.

Combat Encounters

Throughout your adventures, you are bound to encounter unfavorable situations where your only option may be to fight your way out—or in. Combat occurs in cycles of turns, with each creature taking Actions such as attacking, defending, moving, or making other strategic decisions.

Combat begins whenever someone takes an aggressive Action intended to harm or hinder another, and the target chooses (or would choose) to retaliate.

Initiative (Starting Combat)

Creature Positions. When Combat begins everyone needs to understand their relative positions in the Encounter. The Realm Master should use clear descriptions or a map and miniatures to help establish where each creature is located.

Creatures should be placed based on their exact positions at the moment Combat starts. This includes factors like their marching order, where they were standing or moving, and how they approached the situation.

Roll For Initiative! The creature who initiates Combat can take their first Action without spending any Action Points. Afterward, all creatures involved roll for Initiative to determine turn order and Combat begins.

To roll for initiative, each creature (including the one who initiated the combat) rolls a D20 and adds a bonus based on Acuity, a relevant Ability, or an appropriate Skill. Initiative order alternates between allies and enemies, starting with the side that has the highest individual roll. In the case of ties the creature with the higher Acuity goes first, if this is the same the Realm Master or players decide who goes first.

Example. The players roll 13, 4, and 4. Player 3 has 2 Acuity and Player 2 has 3 so they will go first. Their side’s turn order is Player 1, Player 2, and Player 3.

The enemies roll 14, 10, 8, 6, and 4. Their turn order is Enemy 1, Enemy 2, Enemy 3, Enemy 4, and Enemy 5.

The side with the highest individual roll goes first. Combat alternates between the two sides, following this order:

Enemy 1 (14) - Highest overall roll

Player 1 (13)

Enemy 2 (10)

Player 2 (4 - ACU 3)

Enemy 3 (8)

Player 3 (4 - ACU 2)

Enemy 4 (6)

Enemy 5 (4)

Once all creatures have acted, the round ends, and the next round starts with the first creature in the initiative order. As creatures get defeated, all creature’s initiative on their side move up to replace their position in the initiative order (unless it is in the first position). This is done at the beginning of the next round.

Using Different Skills for Initiative. Most of the time, Characters will use Perception to determine initiative. However, certain situations might call for other Skills to keep encounters dynamic and engaging. Use the context of the encounter to decide which Skills are appropriate. Here are some examples:

Stealth. For Characters actively avoiding notice or hiding before Combat begins.

Deception. When a Character initiates a surprise attack during a negotiation or similar situation.

Insight. When a Character realizes a key detail, such as uncovering a diplomat's identity as a spy.

Other Skills. If a player has previously described Actions tied to a specific Skill, such as using Acrobatics to set up a dramatic ambush, they can use that Skill for their initiative roll. However, this should only apply if their Action was established during gameplay, not improvised for the sake of a roll.

Balancing Skill Variety. While allowing players to use alternate Skills can add depth to Encounters, keep it balanced. A player who consistently relies on a high bonus in a specific Skill should ensure their actions align narratively with the situation. If their justifications begin to feel forced or disrupt the flow of the game, the Realm Master should encourage them to return to using Acuity as the default for a while.

Surprise. If certain parties on either side of a fight are unaware of an impending attack when Combat begins, they are considered Surprised. During the first round of Combat, all surprised parties act after the opposing side has taken their turns. Subsequent rounds follow the normal initiative order.

Rounds. A round of Combat represents ten seconds of time and includes every player, creature, and environmental effect taking their respective turns.

For an individual, a round begins at the start of their turn and ends at the start of their next turn. Effects that last "one round" remain active from when they begin until the start of that same turn in the following round.

Companions. If there are any Companions they act after all other Characters and Creatures have gone in any order the Players agree on. If no order can be agreed upon, you can simply use Acuity to determine Companion turn order, settling ties with contested D20 rolls.

Turns. A turn is what an individual actively does during a round by taking Actions. Like rounds, turns represent ten seconds of time. Actions are the things a creature does during its own turn. Reactions are Actions a creature can take outside of its turn, typically in response to specific events.

Communication. Players are free to communicate with each other and with enemies at any time during the round, whether it is their turn or not. However, all communication should reasonably fit within the ten seconds of a game round. If a communication involves an Ability Roll, such as for a Taunt or a Persuade attempt, it must be done using the appropriate Action such as the Ability Roll Action.

Actions

Actions are the things your Character does during their turn. Although there are many options for what Actions you can choose to take you should also improvise and try different Actions, working with the Realm Master to keep it within the bounds they set. This list provides the Actions you can regularly take, each with its own Action Point cost. However, you’re not limited to these options as some Feats and Traits may grant you unique Action options.

Action Points. At the start of combat and the end of each of your turns, your Action Points (AP) are set to 4. AP represents the resource your Character uses to take Actions during a single round (approximately 10 seconds). Different actions require varying amounts of AP, with more complex actions costing more. During your turn, you can spend AP to perform Actions, while outside your turn, AP can be used for Reactions. Improvised actions may have variable AP costs based on their complexity, as determined by the RM.

0 AP Actions. At the end of your turn you gain one free Interaction and one free Ability Roll Action to use during the round. Taking these Actions additional times in the same round will require Action Points as usual. At other times in the game you may encounter “0 AP” Actions, or even abilities activated without an action, unless otherwise stated, these do not count as your one Free Action a turn.

End-of-Turn Overcome Action. At the end of your turn, before gaining Action Points, you may attempt to overcome each condition or effect currently affecting your Character. To do this, roll each Defense that is being targeted by those conditions or effects. Each roll is compared against every relevant Difficulty Score or Potency affecting that Defense.

Overcome Action Example. If you are affected by Slow and Stun, both targeting your Might, and you also have a damage-over-time effect targeting your Fortitude, you would:

Roll Might once and compare that single roll against the Difficulty Scores for both Slow and Stun.

Roll Fortitude once and compare that roll against the Difficulty Score or Potency of the damage-over-time effect.

You may spend 1 Action Point to take this action earlier in your turn instead of at the end.

You may attempt to Overcome the effects in any order.

Multiple Action Penalty. If you take the same Action or Reaction more than once in a turn, and it involves a D20 roll, you incur a -5 penalty to all related D20 rolls each subsequent time you perform that Action. This penalty stacks with each subsequent repetition, increasing from -5 to -10, -15, and so on.

For the purpose of the Multiple Action Penalty, Basic, Quick, and Free Actions or Reactions (each defined below) are all considered the same Action type.

Action

AP

Summary

Basic Action

2

A versatile Action used for making attacks, using Powers, and performing Techniques. Most improvised Actions fall into this category.

Quick Action

1

A versatile Action like the Basic Action used for making attacks, using Powers, and performing Techniques with less AP cost.

Free Action

0

A versatile Action, similar to a Basic or Quick Action, used for making attacks, using Powers, and performing Techniques at no AP cost. However, each additional use of the Free Action in the same turn costs 1 AP each.

Movement

1

When you take this Action you can move up to your Speed. This movement can be split between other Actions. Spending 2 AP on movement in a round allows you to move up to double your Speed. A 3rd movement Action grants the ability to move an extra ½ of your Speed, and a 4th grants an additional ¼. You cannot take more than 4 Movement Actions in a round.

Interaction

1

Draw or sheath a weapon, ingest a liquid, apply a bandage, or perform similar item-related tasks. Interactions can also include Actions like pulling a lever, opening a door, or smashing a pot. If the task requires an Ability roll, you must also use the Ability Roll Action in tandem. It requires 1 AP to administer a non-enhanced consumable to another individual.

Ability Roll

1

Make a Skill or Defense roll for tasks such as searching the ground, pulling a heavy door, climbing a difficult wall, or Overcoming an effect or condition.

Skill Encounter Action

2

Contribute to a Skill Encounter by making a relevant Skill Roll. This Action may involve interacting with objects and making an Ability Roll, but it is not treated as an Ability Roll, Interaction, or Basic Action. The Skill Encounter Action represents focused effort toward overcoming an obstacle during a Combat Encounter, and can only be used for such.

Evade

1

Gain a +2 bonus to your Evasion against the next attack made against you before your next turn. Each additional use of Evade adds a +1 to this bonus. Alternatively, you may distribute these bonuses across multiple attacks in the next round, gaining a +2 bonus for each attack up to the number of times you used the Evade Action. You must decide how to allocate your bonuses—whether stacking them on a single attack, spreading them across multiple attacks, or a combination of both—before any attacker rolls.

Brace

1

Brace yourself against damage. The next time you take damage, reduce it by an amount equal to your Vitality (minimum of 1). If you take this Action multiple times, you gain an additional +1 damage reduction for each use.

Focus

1

Spend time preparing to Overcome a challenge. The next D20 Skill or Defense roll you make, or Score that is targeted, gains a +2 Bonus. You can take this Action multiple times, with each additional use increasing the Bonus by +1. This effect lasts until you use it or until the start of your next turn. This Action can only be used during Combat encounters.

Search

1

If a creature is hidden from you, roll Search to try to locate it. If, at any point during your turn, you come within 2 spaces of the hidden target and your Search roll meets or exceeds the target's Stealth or Hide score, you successfully locate it.

Overcome

1

Done as a 0 AP Action at the end of your turn, before gaining Action Points, roll each against each condition or effect targeting you using the relevant defense(s). Taking this action earlier in a turn costs 1 Action Point.

Additional Actions

More mechanically involved Actions you may take are described below:

Stealth/Hide Action (2 AP)

Make a Stealth or Hide Skill Roll, gaining +1 to the roll for each level of Obscurity you have from target creatures. If you're unobscured, the roll suffers a -4 penalty. If you choose to hide, you must remain Obscured for the duration of your hidden state. You are Hidden from creatures whose Discernment score you surpass with your Skill Roll.

Staying Hidden. At the end of each turn (except the turn in which you first took this action), but before your Action Points are renewed, you must spend 1 Action Point to stay hidden. While hiding, you remain immobile. However, you can spend 1 Action Point on your turn to switch from Hiding to Stealthing, allowing you to move. Similarly, you can switch from Stealthing to Hiding for the same cost. If you switch between these two, you no longer need to spend an Action Point to remain hidden for that turn.

Detection. If you reveal yourself in a way a target could perceive, they may choose to spend a Reaction or Action to detect you. Targets can roll Perceive against your Stealth score or Search against your Hide score, combined with moving closer, to locate you.

If one or more targets successfully Detect you during your turn, you can still attempt to Stealth on that turn, spending 1 Action Point instead of 2 to use the Stealth/Hide Action.

Triggering Detect or Search Actions. While hidden, you can still take Actions, including the Basic Action. Making noise, attacking, or moving through line of sight may trigger an opportunity for targets to search for or detect you.

Attacking. If you attack in a way that would reveal your location, even if you move afterward, any target who saw, heard, or was affected by your attack can use the Detect Reaction or Search Action. When doing so, they gain a +3 bonus to their Perceive and Search rolls.

Moving. If you move from one level of obscurity to a lower one, decreasing your Stealth score below a target's Discernment, you trigger the Detect Reaction. Moving directly through a target’s line of sight grants them the ability to take both the Detect Reaction and Search Action.

Grapple (2 AP)

With an open hand or appendage make a Strength Unarmed Prowess attack to grab an opponent within your melee range targeting their Might or Relex. If you Overcome their Might or Reflex, the target is grappled. You may choose whether or not to deal unarmed damage, using Strength, as part of the grapple.

Escaping a Grapple. Grappled targets can attempt to escape on their turn by rolling Might vs. your Strength Score using the Overcome action. If they succeed, they escape the grapple.

In some cases another roll other than Might may be relevant for escaping grapple, such as rolling Charm against a creature's Resolve to convince them you release you. In these cases check the the Realm Master about your idea first and ensure the party agree’s with the idea.

Movement with Grapple. The grappled target must remain within your melee range and cannot take the Movement Action. Moving while grappling a target requires you to have enough Strength to drag at least half of their weight (+1 Strength per 200 kg), and it reduces your Speed by ½. If you are able to carry their full weight, you may carry them instead.

Size and Grappling. If you attempt to grapple a creature smaller than you, you gain +2 to the grapple roll and to your Strength Score for maintaining the grapple for each size they are smaller. If the target is larger than you, you suffer a -2 penalty for each size they are larger. You cannot grapple creatures more than one size larger than you.

Prepared Actions (X AP)

You may choose to prepare an Action to use as a Reaction later in the round by spending the Action Point cost for that Action on your turn. Specify what you will be reacting to and what the Action will be. You can use the prepared Action even if the specified conditions aren't met, as long as it's a reasonable response to the situation.

If you use a different Reaction before your prepared Action, it may cancel the prepared Action, depending on whether the new reaction interferes with your preparation.

You spend resources such as Energy, Feat uses, or Action Points to use a Prepared Action on your turn, as opposed to when you react. If you fail to utilize the prepared action you do not regain those spent resources.

Power Improvisation (2 AP)

As a Basic Action or Reaction, you can attempt to create a Power that isn’t part of your known Powers. This might be done by modifying a Power you already have or by creating something entirely new. For example, if your fireball Power that blinds creatures doesn’t work against an enemy immune to the Blind condition, you might choose to swap the Blind Part for a Deafening Power Part, emphasizing the explosive noise of the fireball instead of the bright flash.

Describe the type of Power you want to attempt to use to the RM, who will ultimately determine both the Difficulty Score of creating that Power and its Energy cost.

Power Part Estimation. When you create a Power, it helps to have an estimate of which Parts and Mechanics it includes, as well as what its Energy cost should be. You can do this by comparing its relative strength to similar Powers, or by using the Realms Power Creator to quickly throw a Power together.

Difficulty Score. The Difficulty Score is equal to 10 + the Training Point cost of each Power Part added to the Power. If you already have proficiency with any of the Power Parts, use half of those Parts’ Training Point costs instead.

Power Improvisation Roll. After determining the Difficulty Score, roll a Power Attack against it. Count your number of Successes or Failures, and use the results below to determine the Energy cost. You can still use the Power even if you fail.

Energy Cost. Once you have an estimated Energy cost for the Power under normal circumstances, use the table below according to your Power Improvisation Roll to determine the Energy Multiplier. Multiply the estimated Energy cost by this Multiplier to get the final Energy cost.

If this final cost exceeds your Energy reserves, you simply fail to create the Power; retaining your Energy, but losing the Action.

Successes

Energy Multiplier

-3

x5

-2

x4

-1

x3

+1

x2

+2

x1.5

+3

x1

Action Used. By default Power Manipulation is a Basic Action or Reaction, but if you desire to use a different Action entirely, such as a Free Reaction, or Long Action, you can do so! Simply account for that in your Power Part Estimation.

For more information on Power Parts, and creating and using Powers, see Chapter 5: Powers & Techniques

Reactions

The Actions you take outside of your turn are Reactions, although if the situation allows you can take a Reaction on your turn as well.

Reaction

AP

Summary

Basic Reaction

2

Whenever something can be done as simply a “Reaction” it usually refers to the basic Reaction. Basic Reactions are commonly used for reactive Powers or Techniques, when Feats allow, and with some triggered effects.

Quick Reaction

1

Quick Reactions are commonly used for reactive Powers or Techniques, when Feats allow, and with some triggered effects.

Free Reaction

0

A versatile Reaction, similar to a Basic or Quick Reaction, used for making attacks, using Powers, and performing Techniques at no AP cost. However, each additional use of the Free Reaction on the same turn costs 1 AP.

Detect

0

When a hidden creature reveals themselves in a way you can reasonably perceive (e.g., hear or see them), even if they are no longer in the same location, you may take the Detect Reaction. Roll to Perceive against the creature’s Stealth or Hide score. If you meet or exceed the score, you learn the exact location of the creature, even if it is Obscured. Each additional use of this Reaction in the same round costs 1 AP.

Dodge

1

When targeted by an attack you could reasonably dodge, you may use the Dodge Reaction to gain +1 Evasion. This must be done before knowing whether the attack hits or misses.

Help Reaction

1

If an ally you can see or hear appears to, or signals, they need help with an Ability or Skill roll during battle, you can assist by rolling your help die and adding it to their D20 roll. Your assistance must be reasonable for the situation and match your Character's abilities. Additionally, you may spend 1 additional AP to help with tasks requiring an Interaction.

Additional Reactions

More mechanically involved Reactions you may take are described below:

Counter Power (X AP)

You can React to a Power you see or hear being used by countering it with your own Power. To do so, spend the same number of Action Points and Energy as you would normally spend to use your Power. The Power you use doesn’t need to be a Reaction, but it must be a reasonable response in terms of flavor, range, and effect, to counter the opponent's Power.

Make an attack roll with your Power against the attack roll or Score of the opposing Power. Both sides add +1 to their roll or Score for every 5 energy spent on their respective Powers. If your roll exceeds the target roll or Score, you successfully nullify their Power.

If the effect and flavor of your Power only counter a specific part of an opponent's Power, it will do so without impacting the rest of that Power. Determining how and when this applies will involve discussion and is ultimately at the discretion of the Realm Master.

If a player frequently uses one Power to counter all other Powers or stretches its interpretation to justify countering other Powers, the Realm Master may gently address this. They might suggest taking a break from using that Action for the session or have a friendly discussion about balancing its use to ensure everyone’s enjoyment and fairness in the game.

Multiple Counters. More than one creature can attempt to counter a Power. In this case, the Power Proficiency of all creatures countering is added together, along with any energy bonuses (+1 for every 5 energy spent on their respective Powers) to the original creature’s Power attack roll used to counter. The Powers used to counter can also be countered by others in the same way.

Countering Powers Already in Effect. You can also attempt to end or dispel a Power that is already in effect by targeting its original attack score with your own Power. The flavor of your Power must make sense for ending or dispelling the targeted Power.

Collateral Countering. If you use a Power without specifically intending to counter, but it may still affect the opposing Power, you can use your roll to attempt to counter as well. For example, if you use a wind beam attack that knocks a creature back, but there’s also a cloud of poison in the area you want to dispel, your roll could help both knock the creature back and potentially dispel a portion of the poison Power.

Combination Attack (1 AP)

When you can reasonably assist another Character’s attack (melee, ranged, Power, or Technique), you may use this Reaction to help. Roll a die based on your Attack Bonus, rounded up to the nearest even number, and add it to their Attack and Damage Rolls. This functions as a “Help Die.” You can either roll the die once for both rolls or separately for attack and damage.

Making Sense. The way you assist another creature’s attack should align with the nature of their attack. It should make sense in terms of how you are contributing to the Action. For example, you might distract the target with a blow of your own, enhance their Ice Power with your innate Ice Power, or use your abilities to complement theirs in a logical way.

Defend (1 AP)

You can defend an ally or yourself being attacked if both the attacker and the ally are within 1 space of you and if the attack would hit. This can be done after knowing damage.

Shield Defense. If using a shield, treat the attack as if it were directed at you, applying its damage reduction to the attack. This can reduce the damage to 0 unlike other damage reductions.

Weapon Block. If using a weapon with the block property, roll an attack with that weapon. The result becomes your or the ally’s new Evasion (unless it’s lower than their current Evasion).

Body Shield. You may step in front of the attack to protect your ally. You gain -2 to Evasion, and the attack deals double damage if it hits.

Command (1 AP)

You can use this reaction to command, control, or grant a turn to, a Companion. To do so, you must be aware of the creature's whereabouts and have the ability to communicate with it.

Creature's Reaction. When a trigger allows your Companion to take a reaction, you can use this reaction to allow it to do so. Additionally, this use of Command lets you control the creature’s actions on its upcoming turn without needing to use Command again for that turn.

Creature's Turn. If you haven’t already used Command to control the creature’s reaction earlier in the round, you must use the Command reaction at the start of its turn to control its actions for the turn.

Action Point Limitation. Each time you use Command in a round, the number of action points (AP) available to control additional Companions is reduced:

First use. Control all Companion’s available AP.

Second use. Control all Companion’s available AP minus 1.

Third use. Control all Companion’s available AP minus 2 and so on.

When you use Command for a creature’s reaction, the AP available for its turn is determined by its position in the sequence. For instance, if your Companion was the second Companion to be Commanded this round, it you gain the ability to control all it’s available AP minus 1.

A Companion can only be Commanded once each round, and can not be granted additional AP through additional Command Reactions.

Movement

Speed. Your Character’s Speed is equal to half of your Agility plus 6. This represents how many spaces you can travel in 10 seconds (1 round/turn). Each space can be interpreted as a meter and a half or five feet. On a battlemap you may represent a space as a square or hexagon, usually two and a half centimeters or one inch in diameter. Using a measurement stick or tool can be done using these measurements for spaces, and moving pieces independently.

On square grids moving diagonally counts as moving 1.5 spaces.

Jumping. As part of movement you can jump horizontally a number of spaces equal to your Strength or Agility. You can jump vertically a number of spaces equal to half of your Strength or Agility. Jumping beyond these limits requires a successful Athletics or Acrobatics Skill roll against the Distance Score (1 space over your limit adds +5 to a base Difficulty Score of 10).

Climbing. You can climb if you succeed on an Athletics Skill roll or have a Climb Speed from another source. Your Climb Speed is equal to half of your Strength in spaces when Climbing without a specific Climb Speed. Your Realm Master may use the general Difficulty Scores rankings found in “Overcoming Scores” to determine what the DS of climbing a specific wall should be.

Swimming. You can swim if you succeed on an Acrobatics or Athletics (Vitality) Skill roll with a Difficulty Score of 10 for calm waters, or if you have a Swim Speed from another source such as a Feat of Power. Your Swim Speed is equal to half of your Agility or Vitality. Failing to swim causes you to begin suffocating.

Difficult Terrain. Moving through Difficult Terrain costs double the usual movement. Difficult Terrain could be uneven ground, stairs, a food-cluttered table, mud, oily surfaces, riverbeds, etc. Moving through the space of another creature counts as Difficult Terrain. Difficult Terrain penalties do not stack.

Prone. A creature is considered prone when lying down, crawling, etc. and has the Prone Condition. While prone, you count all spaces you move through as Difficult Terrain. To stand up, you must spend 2 spaces of movement. If you have less than 2 movement available, you must use additional movement Action(s) until you have enough movement to stand.

Flanking. A creature is flanked when two or more enemies are within one space of it and positioned on different (not necessarily opposite) sides of the target. While flanking, you or your flanking ally may use a Basic Reaction to make an attack when the target moves outside of one space from either of you.

Falling. When you fall, you take 1d4 bludgeoning damage for every 200 kilograms you weigh, per 2 spaces fallen (up to a maximum of 800 kilograms for 4d4 damage every 2 spaces). Creatures under 200kgs still take 1d4 fall damage as normal (weight rounds up to the nearest 200kgs). Roll Reflex (DS 10 + 1 for every 2 spaces fallen), if you succeed, you take half damage; if you fail, you take full damage and are knocked prone. If you land on another creature, it may attempt a Reflex roll (Same DS) to avoid being hit by you, splitting the damage between both you and the creature if it fails, and both you and the creature are knocked prone. Damage reduction effects do not reduce fall damage.

Your falling speed is 30 spaces, or 45 meters, per round.

Flight. Flying creatures or Characters use their regular Speed as their Flight Speed unless otherwise specified. If a flying creature would gain the Prone condition, it instead falls from whatever height it was at.

Carrying. A medium Character can carry 100 kilograms, plus an additional 100 kilograms for each +1 to Strength they have. These values are halved for small Characters and again for tiny Characters, but doubled for each size larger than medium. For quick reference and calculations use the carry capacity chart in the Size section. Carrying more than half of your maximum capacity halves your movement speed. The minimum amount you can carry is 10 kilograms.

Mounts. To mount or dismount a creature, you spend 3 spaces of movement. Mounted creatures take damage separately from their riders. If the mount is knocked prone, the rider is also unmounted and knocked prone unless they succeed on a DS 15 Reflex or Might roll to avoid it. While mounted, you move at the same speed as the creature. You may mount any willing or unwilling creature that is mountable and at least one size larger than you. Willing mounts can be controlled freely, but unwilling mounts control their own movement unless saddled or another method of control is implored. To mount an unwilling creature, remain mounted, and control it, you must succeed on an Animal Handling skill roll (DS 10 + the mount's level).

Size

Creatures are classified into size categories based on their height and, in some cases, width. Generally, larger creatures take up more space on a battle map. For instance, a Huge creature occupies 4 spaces. The size categories, along with their corresponding height and the number of spaces occupied, are detailed in the Size Table below.

Creature Space and Shape. When a creature occupies multiple spaces, those spaces are typically adjacent to one another. However, some creatures may have unique shapes that result in non-standard arrangements of their occupied spaces.

Additionally, certain creatures may have a width equivalent to the typical height of their size category. For example, a horse, while often 4–5 feet tall (the height of a Medium creature), is approximately 8 feet long (the height of a Large creature) and is therefore classified as a Large creature.

Carrying Capacity. A creature's carrying capacity is determined by its size category, as described in the Size Table. If you carry more than half your maximum capacity, your movement speed is halved. Regardless of your Strength score, you can carry a minimum weight equal to the bonus you’d multiply by your Strength in kilograms, even if your Strength is negative. Ie if your size was Tiny and you had a Strength of -2, you could still carry 10kgs. For ease of reference, use the carrying capacity by size chart below.

Movement Through Enemy Spaces When moving through the space of an enemy creature that is your size or smaller, the space is considered difficult terrain. You cannot end your turn in the same space as another creature unless that creature occupies more than double the number of spaces you do (e.g., a Medium creature occupying one of the spaces of a Huge creature).

Size

Height

Spaces Occupied

Carrying Capacity

Min. Carrying Capacity

Miniscule

Under 1 ft

1/8

10 kg + 5 kg x Strength

5 kgs

Tiny

1 - 2 ft

1/4

25 kg + 10 kg x Strength

10 kgs

Small

2 - 4 ft

1

50 kg + 25 kg x Strength

25 kgs

Medium

5 - 7 ft

1

100 kg + 50 kg x Strength

50 kgs

Large

7 - 10 ft

1-2

200 kg + 100 kg x Strength

100 kgs

Huge

10 - 15

4

400 kg + 200 kg x Strength

200 kgs

Humongous

15 - 25

9

800 kg + 400 kg x Strength

400 kgs

Gargantuan

25+

16+

1600 kg x 800 kg x Strength

800 kgs

Attacking

To make an attack, you must state your target as part of your Action or as a Reaction. Ensure you're within range before attacking. The standard Melee Range is within a 1 space radius of your character. Ranged attack ranges depend on the weapon or Power used.

Targeting. When you make an attack—whether with a Power, Technique, weapon, or unarmed prowess—you are always targeting a defense or Evasion. Most attacks target Evasion by default. If you encounter terms like "Hit" or "Attack" without further clarification, they are typically referring to targeting Evasion. The attacker always has the active position and will make an Attack Roll.

Using Powers, Techniques, and certain Feats, you sometimes target multiple Defenses with the same attack or Action. When this occurs, the attacker will always roll to hit Evasion (if applicable), as well as roll against all (but one) of the targeted Defenses.

The defending creature then rolls their untargeted Defense, typically against the attacker’s Attack Score, to Overcome the attack. The untargeted Defense is usually chosen based on which effect would have the most detrimental impact on the defender (e.g., dealing the most damage or applying the most severe condition or effect).

Attack Rolls

To Overcome a target's defense with an attack, roll a D20 and add your Attack Bonus. Your Attack Bonus is either your Martial Bonus or your Power Bonus depending on the type of Attack made. These bonuses cannot be combined.

Weapon Attack Roll. When attacking with a weapon, certain Techniques, or unarmed prowess, you declare your target and ensure you're within the proper range for your weapon. Then, make a D20 attack roll against the relevant defense, usually Evasion, adding your Martial Bonus to the roll.

Weapon Attack Roll Formula

D20 + Martial Bonus = Weapon Attack Roll

Martial Bonus. Your Martial Bonus is the combination of your Martial Proficiency and a Relevant Ability.

Martial Bonus Formula

Relevant Ability + Martial Proficiency = Martial Bonus

Martial Proficiency. This is a number, usually between 0 and 6, that determines how proficient you are with wearing armor and wielding weapons effectively. You will learn more about your Martial Proficiency in Chapter 2: Character Creation, where you can choose between it and a Power Proficiency.

Martial Potency. When you make an attack, your enemy may need to make a roll to resist the effect after you've applied it. The target number they need to beat to lessen or shake off the effect is known as your Martial Potency, essentially your "Attack Score." This is calculated as your Martial Bonus + 10. Martial Potency serves as the consistent, passive value for your Martial attacks, some feats, and techniques, representing the threshold enemies must surpass when you're not actively rolling against them.

Martial Potency Formula

Martial Bonus + 10 = Potency

Relevant Weapon Abilities. The Ability used for the Martial Bonus depends on the weapon used for attacking:

Attack Types

Ability

Melee Weapon

Strength

Ranged Weapon

Acuity

Unarmed Prowess

Strength or Agility (if proficient)

Finesse Weapon

Agility

Thrown Weapon

Strength

Power Attack Roll. When attacking with a Power, you declare your target(s) and ensure you're within the proper range for your Power. Most Powers require sight of a creature to target it. Make a D20 attack roll against the relevant Defense, adding your Power Bonus to the roll. Powers often target multiple creatures; in these cases, you only roll once, targeting all affected creatures.

Power Attack Roll Formula

D20 + Power Bonus = Power Attack Roll

Power Bonus. Your Power Bonus is the combination of your Power Proficiency and your Power Ability.

Power Bonus Formula

Power Ability + Power Proficiency = Power Bonus

Power Proficiency. This is a number, usually between 0 and 6, that determines how proficient you are with storing Innate Energy and using Powers effectively. You will learn more about your Power Proficiency in Chapter 2: Character Creation where you will be able to choose between it and a Martial Proficiency.

Power Ability. This is the main Ability that pairs with your type of Power usage and best fits your Character. You may choose between Acuity, Intelligence, and Charisma as your Power Ability. Your RM may allow you to choose another Ability if it aligns with your Character's flavor, provided it doesn’t make the Character more powerful than intended.

Power Potency. When you make a power attack, your enemy may need to make a roll to resist the effect after you've applied it. The target number they need to beat to lessen or shake off the effect is known as your potency—essentially your "Power Attack Score." This is calculated as your Power Bonus + 10. Potency serves as the consistent, passive value for your power attacks, representing the threshold enemies must surpass when you're not actively rolling against them.

Power Potency Formula

Power Bonus + 10 = Potency

Archetype Proficiency. Your Archetype Proficiency is a combined measure of your Martial Proficiency and Power Proficiency, or just one of them if you don’t have the other. It serves as a reference for various game mechanics, but it does not directly influence gameplay through specific bonuses or effects. Essentially, it’s a way of indicating your Character's overall expertise in either Martial Combat, Power usage, or both, and it is used to guide other aspects of the game.

Archetype Potency. Archetype Potecny, or simply “Potency,” is your Martial or Power Potency, whichever is higher if you have both.

Ranged Attacks. Ranged attacks made against a target within 1 space incur a -5 penalty to their Attack Rolls. Ranged and Thrown attacks are attacks that are made with a Power or Weapon that has the Range or Thrown property or part. With a Ranged or Thrown Weapon you can attempt to target at a distance equal four times that of the Ranged or Thrown Weapons’ normal distance, but do so with a -5 long-range penalty.

Hitting. If your total Attack roll equals or exceeds the target's Evasion (EV), or related Defense Score the attack hits and takes effect.

Attacking Objects

When targeting inanimate objects such as pots, walls, doors, plants, and so on, there are simple rules you can use.

Targeting. You automatically hit any attack directed at an inanimate object, provided the object is within the normal parameters of your attack (e.g., within range and meeting any specific requirements). No attack roll is required, and the object automatically fails all defense rolls. This also implies attacks against objects cannot be critical hits.

Defenses. Any power, feat, or attack targeting an inanimate object automatically fails and has no effect if it targets Mental Fortitude, Resolve, or Discernment. Exceptions may apply if the effect's flavor is deemed appropriate for the situation, as determined by the Realm Master.

Triggered Effects. Many effects, such as feats or reaction powers, activate upon successfully hitting with an attack. For these effects, hitting, damaging, or destroying an inanimate object does not count as a trigger.

Determine Damage

After Overcoming a target’s Defense or hitting with an attack that deals damage you must calculate the damage dealt. Usually this means rolling any Damage Dice the Weapon or Power may have (e.g., 1d4, 1d6, 1d12, 2d6), taking that total, then adding the Power or Martial Bonus.

Powers. When you deal damage with a Power, you add your Power Bonus to that damage. If the Power doesn’t deal damage by itself you do not deal your Power Bonus in damage.

Techniques. A Technique only adds a Martial Bonus to damage if you use Unarmed Prowess or a Weapon as part of the Technique, in which case you’d add your Martial Bonus using the Relevant Ability to the damage.

Proficiency. When attacking with a weapon without full proficiency, you only add half of the relevant Ability to the Attack and Damage Rolls and no Martial Proficiency. If you are partially proficient with the weapon's damage type (e.g., proficient with 1d6 slashing but wielding a 1d8 slashing weapon), you roll a die that matches your proficiency (1d6 in this case) to a minimum of 1d4.

You can only use the properties of a weapon if you are proficient with those properties. Weapon Proficiency is fully detailed in Chapter 3: Items & Equipment.

Damage Reductions. After damage is dealt, the target takes into account first any base damage reductions, then any weaknesses or resistances which would reduce or increase the amount of damage taken. The minimum amount an Attack can be reduced to is 1 unless otherwise stated or the target has Immunity to the damage type dealt. Damage reduction applies to the total damage that would be dealt in one instance, and not to each individual damage type dealt in that instance.

Effects. Applicable effects of the attack are applied after damage. Once all effects have been resolved, the Attack has been completed.

Non-Lethal Damage: Before dealing damage, a Character may declare that their attack is intended to be non-lethal. If the damage would otherwise reduce the target to 0 Health or lower, the target is instead rendered unconscious for 1 hour. After this period, they regain 1 Health and consciousness.

Critical Hits

When an attack roll for an attack that exceeds the target's Evasion or relevant Defense by +10 it’s called a Critical Hit or simply a Critical. This means you double the amount of damage dice rolled, if any, for that attack. For example, an attack that deals 1d6 + Attack Bonus damage would instead deal 2d6 + Attack Bonus on a Critical Hit.

Critical Multiplier. Your Critical Multiplier determines how much your damage dice are multiplied on a Critical Hit. The standard Critical Multiplier is 2×, meaning you roll twice the normal amount of damage dice on a Critical Hit. Some weapons, feats, powers, or techniques can increase this multiplier.

Whenever your Critical Multiplier increases by +1 or +1x, it adds one additional multiple of your normal damage dice.

Critical Multiplier Example. If you have a Critical Multiplier of 3× (which is +1 above the standard 2×) and you make an attack that would normally deal 3d6 damage, you instead roll 3d6 × 3 = 9d6 This increased total applies only to the damage dice portion of the attack.

Critical Range. Critical Range is the amount over a Defense that is required to achieve a Critical Hit. The standard amount is +10 over a relevant defense, but by reducing your Critical Range, you make this amount less. Reducing you Critical Range by -2, for instance, would cause you to only require +8 above a relevant Defense to attain a Critical Hit.

Multiple Sources. When you have multiple sources of Critical Range or Multiplier adjustments they can stack with eachother, causing a compounding increase or decrease. For instance, having a feat that decreases your Critical Range by 2 in certain conditions, combined with a weapon that has a -1 reduced Critical Range, would result in a Critical Range of +7 over the relevant Defense. The same applies for Critical Multipliers and their sources.

Coup De Grâce. Whenever you attempt to attack a creature outside of Combat that is unconscious or asleep and within 1 space, you automatically hit and achieve a critical hit.

Improvised Weapons & Unarmed Prowess

For Martial Characters, weapons are usually an essential part of Combat unless you specialize solely in unarmed prowess. Weapons come in various shapes, forms, sizes, and have different utilities. As a general rule, all weapons require at least one hand to use.

Dual Wielding. You can dual-wield two one-handed weapons as long as both have the Interchangeable weapon property. When you take an Action to make an Attack, you may spend a Quick Action to attack with your off-hand weapon without incurring a Multiple Action Penalty on the same turn. You add your Martial Bonus to the attack and damage rolls of your primary weapon as usual, but you only add your Martial Attack Bonus to the attack roll to hit, but not damage of the off-hand attack.

Techniques and Powers apply to only one weapon at a time. To use both weapons in a Technique, you must pay the Energy cost to add both.

Improvised Weapons. When using something you are not proficient with or which is not a weapon by nature, but that you are using like one, you use 1d4 for damage and add ½ of your Strength to melee attack and damage rolls made with it. The damage type matches whatever would best fit the flavor of the weapon, such as bludgeoning for a chair leg, or slashing for a shard of glass. If your strength is negative, double it instead. This cannot make the damage less than 0.

Thrown Improvised Weapons and Objects. If you are throwing an improvised weapon or object you add ½ of your Strength to your Attack and Damage rolls and throw it accurately a number of spaces equal to double your Agility or Strength to a minimum of one. Whenever throwing anything it must weigh less than ½ of your carrying capacity. These weapons deal 1d4 damage as normal for Improvised Weapons.

You can throw items a distance four times that of your Agility or Strength but the accuracy of the throw is reduced, equaling a minus 5 penalty to any roll relating.

Unarmed Prowess.

The ability to use any part of your body to attack is called Unarmed Prowess. All Characters can make unarmed attacks, using half their Strength for their attack Bonus and dealing damage equal to half their Strength as well.

Attack Bonus & Damage. When proficient with Unarmed Prowess you use your full Strength or Agility, as well as adding your Martial Proficiency to the attack and to determine damage.

Gaining proficiency with Unarmed Prowess is explained in Chapter 4: Equipment, Crafting, & Downtime. Proficiency with Unarmed Prowess can increase in level over time, adding dice to the damage rolls of unarmed prowess instead of simply using the Attack Bonus to determine damage.

Quick Attacks. After using an Action to make an attack with Unarmed Prowess you may make a second attack with Unarmed Prowess the during same turn as a Quick Action without incurring the Multiple Action Penalty. This may only be done once a turn.

Armor & Damage

The rules for Armor, Shields, Damage Reductions, and Healing, are found below.

Armor

Armor is an essential part of staying safe in battle for many Characters, and it can mean the difference between life and death when the stakes are high!

Armor provides protection by reducing damage and/or decreasing the chance for a target to achieve a critical hit against you. It comes in various shapes and sizes, may require specific Abilities like high Strength to wear, can potentially reduce your Agility, and may have vulnerabilities or resistances to certain damage types.

Armor Damage Reduction. The most common benefit of armor is its base damage reduction, which applies to all damage types except Psychic, Spiritual and Sonic damage. While specialized armor may reduce these damage types, standard common or uncommon armor usually does not.

Damage reduction decreases all applicable damage types by the amount specified in the armor's description to a minimum of 1. However, each time the armor reduces damage within a single turn, its effectiveness diminishes by 1 point until the beginning of the next turn. This means armor becomes less effective the more damage you take in a turn.

Taking damage types that are not reduced by your armor does not decrease its damage reduction for that turn.

Any damage that occurs over time, such as long-liner damage, does not get reduced by armor.

Armor Resistance. Armor with resistance to a specific damage type reduces that type by double the armor's base Damage Reduction and increases its Critical Range against that type (if any increase) by double.

Armor Vulnerability. If armor is vulnerable to a specific damage type, it provides no reduction to the damage of that type, as well as no increase to Critical Range against attacks of that type. However, if the attack involves multiple damage types, the armor can still reduce other damage types.

Critical Range Increase. When something increases your Critical Range, it increases the margin by which an attack must exceed your Defense or Evasion to achieve a Critical Level. For example, increasing your Critical Range by 1 would adjust the Critical Range to +11.

Shields

Shields work as an active way to reduce damage through using Reactions. To reduce damage with a shield you take the Defend Reaction making a Strength attack roll against the attack roll made. If you meet or exceed that roll you roll your Shield Die (1d4, 1d6, 1d8 etc.) and reduce the damage by that much.

Damage

Damage Reductions. Similar to armor, each time you are dealt damage in a round that would be reduced, the effectiveness of each damage reduction effect (such as from a feat or Power) decreases by 1 point until the beginning of the next turn. This means that sources of damage reduction become less effective the more damage of their type you take in a single turn.

Resistance. You take half damage of a specified damage type, rounded up.

If you have multiple sources of Resistance to the same damage type you instead gain Immunity until you would no longer have multiple sources of Resistance.

Vulnerability. You take double damage of a specified damage type.

If you are both Resistant and Vulnerable to a damage type at the same time, each instance of these effects cancel each other out.

Immunity. You cannot be damaged by a specified damage type.

Energy Damage. If your Energy (EN) total drops below 0, you take 1 damage for each point of Energy below 0 (e.g., if Energy drops to -3, you take 3 damage). Your Energy cannot fall below 0, and you cannot cause your own Energy to fall below 0.

Healing. When you Heal, you regain a number of Health equal to the amount healed, up to your Health Maximum. When healed by a Power, you heal an additional amount equal to the Power Bonus of the one healing you.

Overheal. When you Overheal, you heal a number of Health equal to the amount overhealed, which can exceed your Health Maximum temporarily. Overhealed Health last until you take damage that would put you below you maximum Health, or until you complete a recovery. All sources of Overheal can stack.

Death & Dying

Dropping to Zero or Negative HP. If damage reduces your Health (HP) to 0 or below, you enter the Dying condition and fall prone immediately. While in the Dying condition, you immediately drop to 1 Action Point, and  only gain 1 Action Point at the end of your turns.

If your HP total falls below 0, each point below 0 is counted as a Negative Health, and you take escalating damage on your subsequent turns in the Dying Condition:

1d4 damage on the first turn,

2d4 damage on the second turn,

4d4 damage on the third turn,

And so on, with the damage doubling each turn.

You cannot lose the Dying condition until your HP is healed to a value above 0.

Stabilizing. To stop a target with negative Health from losing additional Health each turn, they must be stabilized. Stabilization can be achieved through a Medicine roll, bandages, potions, feats, or Healing Powers. The target may receive any amount of Healing to stabilize (see example below).

Once stabilized, the target stops taking damage at the start of their turn. However, if they take damage while still below 0 Health after stabilization, they resume taking damage each turn, starting at 1d4, with the damage doubling each turn as before.

Dying and Stabilizing Example. In this example, Nia is hurt badly and will need quick attention from their allies to be stabilized.

Nia (playing Isolde): Isolde is hit hard and falls to the ground, her HP dropping to -8.

Rita (DM): On your turn, roll 1d4 to see how much more damage you take.

Nia: (Rolls 1d4 and gets a 2) Isolde's HP drops to -10.

Eli (playing Kadin): I rush over and use Medicine to stabilize her.

Rita: Roll Medicine.

Eli: 15. That should work, right?

Rita: That puts Isolde at -9 HP. The healing you’ve received stabilizes Isolde!

Nia: Thank the gods! Isolde’s still alive.

Death

If damage reduces your HP to the negative inverse of your total HP your Character dies (e.g., if your total HP is 20, you die when your HP reaches -20).

Companions in Encounters

Skill Encounters

During a Skill Encounter, a Character can have up to two Companions assist them in the following ways:

Helping. One Companion can assist a Character with a Skill Roll if it is proficient in the relevant skill and the context allows it. This does not require any action from the Character.

Making Skill Rolls. A Companion can make a Skill Roll instead of the Character, but this requires the Character to sacrifice their own Skill Roll to command the creature. If they do so, they may still help either the Companion or another Character with a Skill Roll.

Both. If a Character has two Companions involved, they can:

Sacrifice their Skill Roll to allow one Companion to make a Skill Roll.

Additionally, they may give up their ability to help another Character or Companion, allowing their second Companion to provide assistance instead.

Combat Encounters

Companion’s function similar in combat to Characters and other creature’s with a few notable differences.

Initiative. Companion’s turns are taken at the very end of the combat round, in order of Percieve skill bonuses, with tie’s being decided by the players as to who goes first. The first Companion’s turn will be directly after the last enemy or ally.

Action Points & Turns. Companions, like Characters, always have 4 AP. On a creature’s turn it only takes the ready action to dodge with all 4 AP unless it is otherwise commanded using the command reaction. This means without being commanded, a Companion simply gain’s +1 Evasion on the next 4 attacks that target it. A Companion can be commanded prior to it’s turn as outlined in the command reaction.

Dying. A Companion does not enter the dying condition, instead it is considered dead once it reaches 0 or less HP. For summoned Companion’s this simply causes them to be unsummoned, but for bonded Companions it results in actual casualty unless through the intervention of powers or feats.

Outside of Encounters

A Companion’s behavior and personality are defined by its owner. Rather than detracting from roleplay, Companions should serve as opportunities to enhance Character development and story moments.

Since a Character with a Companion introduces additional creatures into the party, players should be mindful of this dynamic. Companions should not overshadow other Characters or disrupt the balance of time and attention each player receives. Maintaining courtesy ensures that all players have an equal opportunity to contribute and engage in the game.

Acting Outside Encounters. Outside of encounters, Companions can act much like Characters, participating in roleplay, making Ability Rolls, using out-of-encounter feats and powers, and more. They can contribute to the story and problem-solving in unique ways.

Conditions

Conditions are temporary effects that apply to a creature or Character for a specified duration. Each condition works as outlined in the Condition list below. To avoid being affected by some conditions, the target of a condition will often need to attempt to Overcome that Condition using a relevant Defense, such as using Might to Overcome the Restrained Condition.

Leveled Conditions

Most conditions followed by a number, “Stunned 2” for example, are called level conditions. These conditions have an effect that is proportional to its number. For instance, Stunned 2 removes 2 Action Points.

Conditions Exceeding Values. If at any time a condition exceeds the number for which it is reducing (Stunned 5 exceeds 4 Action points) then it reduces that number to a minimum of 1. For Stun this would mean it would reduce the affected Action Points by 3 to a minimum of 1 at the end of the turn. The same is true for Slowed and Movement Speed, but not for any conditions that affect D20 Rolls.

Multiple Sources of the Same Condition. When more than one source attempts to apply the same Condition to a creature, use the following rules:

Conditions Don’t Stack. A creature can be affected by only one instance of a given Condition at a time. Leveled Conditions do not combine; new sources cannot add levels to an existing one.

Durations also do not stack. The duration currently in effect is determined by whichever instance of the condition is active.

Replacing Conditions. If another source would apply the same Condition, whether with a different level, potency, duration, or targeted defense, the Realm Master along with the Players can determine which version applies. As an general rule, the stronger version replaces the weaker one. If both conditions are inflicted by players, the players may decide which condition takes effect. The weaker version is removed and its duration does not continue.

Strength is determined by the RM, based on factors such as: Condition level, Condition potency (if applicable), Duration, The defense targeted (if relevant to severity)

RM Note: When two versions are close in strength, the RM adjudicates which one meaningfully imposes the greater effect. Player input is allowed, but the RM’s ruling is final.

Condition List

The following list covers all conditions in the game, and what they do.

Blinded. All targets are considered Completely Obscured to a blinded creature that relies on basic vision. Acuity Skill rolls that rely on sight automatically fail.

Charmed. Charmed creatures can't attack or perform harmful Actions against the creature that charmed them. All Charisma rolls and potencies against this target from the charmer gain +2.

Restrained. Restrained creatures cannot take Actions or Reactions that require the use of their arms. In some cases, a Realm Master may rule that Restrained creatures can take an Action using their hands with limited mobility.

Dazed You cannot take Reactions.

Deafened. You cannot hear anything in the world around you. You have resistance to Sonic damage. Acuity Skill rolls that rely on hearing automatically fail.

Dying. When your Health total is reduced to zero or a negative value, you enter the Dying Condition. Each turn, at the beginning of your turn, you take 1d4 irreducible damage, doubling each turn (1d4, then 1d8, 2d8, 4d8, and so on). While dying, you are prone and only gain 1 Action Point at the end of your turn. Upon entering the dying condition, your Action points are reduced to 1 (if you had any).

Faint. You have -1 to Evasion, Might, Reflex and on all D20 rolls requiring balance or poise, such as climbing, dancing, and acrobatics. Outside forces gain +1 to D20 rolls and potency to make you prone, knock you back, or grapple you.

Grappled. Grappled targets have -2 to Attack rolls, are +2 to hit, cannot move away from the grappler, must remain within the same distance of it or closer, and cannot take movement Actions.

Hidden. While hidden, you have a +2 bonus on Attack rolls made against creatures unaware of your location in addition to any bonus granted by Obscurity. Hidden implies that your exact location is unknown to targets and cannot be discovered unless a successful Perceive or Search roll is made against your Stealth or Hide Score. Becoming hidden usually requires a Stealth or Hide action.

Immobile. Immobile creatures cannot take Movement Actions, and their Speed is considered 0. Their Speed cannot be increased by any effect until the immobile condition is removed.

Invisible. You are considered Completely Obscured to all creatures relying on basic vision.

Prone. Your Speed is reduced by ½ and you are a +2 to hit from creatures within Melee range. Increase your level of Obscurity by 2 against creatures that aren’t above you or in your melee range.

Terminal. Your current health is at or below ¼ of your maximum health, placing you in the Terminal Range. Terminal creatures appear gravely injured and close to defeat.

Leveled Conditions

Bleed. Lose 1 Health at the beginning of your turn for each level of Bleed. Any healing received reduces the bleeding condition by the amount healed, but reduces the amount restored to Health by an equal amount.

Exhausted. For each level of Exhaustion, reduce all bonuses and Evasion by an amount equal to that level. Additionally, for every 2 levels of Exhaustion (starting at level 2), your Speed is reduced by 1. This affects all Scores calculated using Bonuses as well.

You can recover from Exhaustion incrementally; for each full recovery, reduce your Exhaustion level by 1. However, if your Exhaustion level ever exceeds 10, your Character dies.

Exposed. Decrease all defenses and Evasion by an amount equal to the level of Exposed.

Frightened. Frightened creatures have a penalty to all Scores and D20 rolls against the source of their fear equal to the level of frightened, and a penalty to all Scores and D20 rolls while they have vision of the source of their fear equal to half the level of frightened.

Staggered. Decrease Evasion by an amount equal to your Staggered level.

Resilient. Reduce damage taken by an amount equal to your Resilient level.

Slowed. Decrease all Speed types by an amount equal to your Slowed level.

Stunned. Stunned creatures lose 1 or more Action Points based on the level of Stun (e.g., Stun 2 immediately removes 2 Action Points and reduces points gained at the end of the turn by 2). A stunned creature always receives at least 1 Action Point at the end of their turn.

Susceptible. Increase all damage taken by an amount equal to your Susceptible level.

Weakened. Decrease all D20 rolls by an amount equal to your Weakened level.

🧙 Character Creation & Leveling

Character Creation

In this chapter, you’ll create your Character—your playable avatar in the game world. Your Character will be a unique blend of Traits, Feats, Skills, Abilities, Techniques, and Powers. Every detail, from their personality and appearance to the intricate aspects of their abilities, is entirely yours to shape.

You’ll begin by selecting a Species then Ancestry Traits, Species’ Flaws, and Species’ Characteristics. Next, you’ll define your Character’s Abilities, Skills, and other game statistics. Finally, you’ll choose Feats to establish your Character’s Archetype, then select or craft their Equipment, Powers, and Techniques.

A finalized Character is never truly finished evolving. As you play and explore the game world, your Character will gain experience and grow stronger by leveling up. Each new level brings opportunities to acquire additional Feats, enhance Abilities, develop new Techniques and Powers, and improve their proficiencies.

You can get ideas for what type of Character you’d like to make by using the Roll-Tables at the end of this chapter.

Talk with your RM. Before diving into Character creation, take time to discuss the game world with your RM. Talk about the type of world the game takes place in, including the Powers, magic, mechanics, or other inventions that exist, as well as the overall genre and their expectations for your player Character.

It can also be helpful to discuss Character ideas with other players to understand their concepts and ensure a well-rounded group dynamic.

When designing your Character, make sure they align with the genre and setting of the world while also being someone you’ll genuinely enjoy playing.

Your Character Sheet

Your Character needs a place to take shape, and that place is the Character sheet. Whether you choose a digital or physical Character sheet will often depend on your party’s preferences and dynamic, so use the option that works best for you.

Digital Character sheets offer automatic calculations, easy updates, and access from anywhere, making them convenient and efficient. On the other hand, physical Character sheets provide a classic, hands-on experience that can help you stay present during sessions and offer the satisfying tactile feedback of pencil on paper.

Digital Character Sheet. The Character Sheet included in the Realms Alpha Packet is hosted on Google Sheets™. It features built-in formulas to automatically calculate key game values, but these can be deleted and replaced with your own inputs if desired. Editable fields are marked with grey-colored cells, ensuring you can make adjustments without disrupting the sheet’s formulas.

Digital Character Sheet Tabs. The Google Sheets™ Character Sheet includes multiple tabs at the bottom that are described below:

Main Page. This tab contains the core details of your Character, including essential stats and information.

Powers/Techniques. Here, you’ll manage Martial and Power Proficiency values, define Martial and Power Abilities, and list your Powers, Techniques, and Power Part Proficiencies.

Equipment & Inventory. This tab tracks your carrying capacity, currency, and owned items, including weapons, armor, and other equipment. It also lists your Armor and Weapon Proficiencies.

Character Details. Use this tab to record personalized information such as your Character’s backstory, description, archetype, and other notes.

Quick Character Reference. A convenient summary page that compiles all critical details from other tabs for easy reference during gameplay.

Physical Character Sheet. The Physical Character Sheet is available in two formats:

Blank PDF. This version can be printed and filled out with pencil, allowing you to easily edit details by erasing and rewriting as needed. It has similar sections with a slightly different layout.

Form-Fillable PDF. This version has the same layout but allows you to input details directly into the PDF to use as is, or to print with pre-filled, unchanging values.

Custom PDF. This version of the Character sheet allows you to customize every value, enabling you to create unique names for Powers, energy, and any other aspects you wish to personalize.

All versions are included in the Realms Alpha Packet.

Creating Your Character

Using this chapter, you will be able to create your Character using the following steps:

Decide on an Archetype. Your Character’s role, theme, and general playstyle will help guide their Abilities, Feats, and Development.

Determine your Ancestry. Your Species, along with your choices of that Species' Ancestry Traits, Flaws, and Characteristics.

Determine Abilities. Your Character's fundamental strengths and weaknesses determine how they perform physically and mentally.

Build your Archetype. Based on your Archetype, choose Feats and determine your Skill, Armor, Weapon, Martial, and Power Proficiencies.

Fill in Details. Using the choices you’ve made, fill in the remaining details on your Character sheet.

Equip Your Character. Finally, you will create and choose your Character’s Powers, Techniques, and Armaments, then fill their inventory with Items.

Step 1: Decide on an Archetype

Begin by deciding what type of Character you’d like to play and what their specialties, class, style, or general Skill set will be. These choices help define the Archetype your Character embodies. Archetypes can include traditional classes like ranger, rogue, mage, or wizard, but they can also extend to more unique or unconventional roles such as trickster, mime, chef, artist, and beyond.

Whatever archetype you choose, consider the Abilities it might require, the Skills and Feats you’d expect, and an Ancestry that aligns with your vision.

Martial or Power Characters. Your Archetype will fall into one of three categories that help describe how your Character achieves their goals in Encounters and other situations.

Martial Characters. Characters who achieve success through physical skill, tactical ingenuity, or specialized Techniques, relying on their natural abilities rather than supernatural Powers. Martial Characters can encompass a wide range of approaches, from disciplined warriors and charismatic fighters who manipulate or distract, to clever tricksters who rely on deception, tools, and cunning to achieve their goals.

Power Characters. Characters who draw on supernatural, magical, mechanical, spiritual, or similar sources to succeed in various situations. Power Characters can express their abilities in diverse ways, such as commanding mechanical allies, wielding empowered weaponry, casting mana-fueled spells, performing enchanting songs, or radiating spiritual eminence.

Powered-Martial Characters. Characters who combine physical skill and tactical ingenuity with supernatural, magical, mechanical, or spiritual elements. Powered-Martial Characters blend the best of both worlds, using their enhanced abilities in unique ways. Examples include elemental martial artists who channel fire or lightning into their strikes, rangers with empowered arrows that explode on impact, or warriors who fight alongside magically summoned companions.

Archetype Ability

After you have a better idea of your Character’s Archetype, it’s important to consider what their primary Archetype Ability will be. This reflects their core strengths and how they approach challenges. Out of the six Abilities, Power Abilities are typically Intelligence, Charisma, or Acuity, while Martial Abilities are usually Strength, Vitality, Agility, or Acuity. Your choice helps define your Character’s unique style and determines their growth in Energy and other key attributes.

Power Ability. This represents your Character’s connection to supernatural, magical, or extraordinary abilities. It determines the Energy they gain each level, the strength of their Power attacks, and their Training Points for crafting Powers. The combination of Power Ability and Power Proficiency forms the Power Bonus, which boosts healing, damage, and Power-related rolls.

For example, Intelligence as a Power Ability would suit a wizard who studies spells and refines their craft, while Charisma might fit a bard enchanting audiences with magical performances. An Acuity Power Ability could represent a monk channeling elemental forces through focus, or a druid whose sharp attunement to the wild harnesses the power of nature.

Martial Ability. This reflects your Character’s physical Combat style and approach to challenges. It influences Energy and Training Points for creating Techniques and gaining proficiencies. Different Abilities could be used for a variety of approaches to Archetypes.

For instance, Strength might suit a fighter wielding heavy weapons, while Vitality could represent a resilient tank absorbing damage. Agility might define a nimble archer or a rogue excelling in precision and evasion. An Acuity Martial Ability could reflect a sharpshooter analyzing the battlefield with precision or a tactician adept at perceiving and avoiding attacks.

Powered-Martial Abilities. A Powered-Martial Character picks both a Martial and Power Ability and simply uses the higher for things like determining Energy and Training Points.

Unconventional Abilities. Choosing an unconventional Archetype Ability may be allowed with your RM’s approval, provided you consult with them first and ensure the chosen Ability doesn’t give your Character an unfair power level for their current level. For example, selecting Vitality as a Power Ability could be considered unconventional if your Character uses their physical stamina to cast spells.

Bringing It Together. Your Archetype Ability defines your Character’s primary strengths and growth path, whether through Martial prowess, supernatural Powers, or a combination of both. It serves as a creative foundation without limiting your Character’s potential. For example, a Martial Character could still excel in tactical Skills or social expertise, while a Power Character might focus on physical agility or resilience. By customizing Energy, Techniques, and proficiencies to align with your vision, you can create a Character that evolves uniquely within your story and party dynamic. You’ll fully develop your Archetype later, so for now, keep the idea in mind and hold that thought.

Write This Down...

Now that you've chosen your Archetype and Archetype Ability, go to your Character sheet and fill in the Martial and/or Power symbol next to that Ability. You may also want to note the name and description of your Archetype in Character details, though you may choose to do this later when you’ve built out your Character more.

Energy. This is your archetype's primary resource for performing Techniques and using Powers. Tied to your Power or Martial Ability, Energy can take many forms depending on your Character’s concept. For a Power Character, it might represent mana, divine favor, or even a “Blood Pool” for a blood mage. For a Martial Character, it usually represents stamina, focus, or another resource reflecting their physical and tactical endurance. Get creative and tailor Energy to fit your Character’s narrative.

Write This Down...

You may wish to change the name of “Energy” to better match your Character’s flavor. Simply use the Custom Character Sheet PDF or change the name in your Digital Sheet. Despite the name being different, rules that refer to “Energy” still refer to this resource.

Step 2: Determine Your Ancestry

Your Character’s Species and Ancestry define their genetic predispositions and inherent qualities. The Species represents a broad classification, while Ancestry delves into the specific traits and attributes passed down through generations.

Pick a Species. Head on over to the Realms Codex - Section 1: Species. Here you’ll find a list of Species from which you may choose to be as your Character. Each Species grants a Character proficiency with two Languages and Skills. It also provides one or two Sizes to choose from and that species average Weight, Height, and Age. You should pick values for each of these attributes that are relatively within the ranges described by your Species.

Write This Down...

Write down your chosen Size, Height, Weight, Age, and Languages in the Character details section. Add your proficient Skills to your Skill list and mark them with “Prof.” Refer to “Skills” in Chapter 1 for Skill Bonus calculations, and record the bonus in the Bonus field.

Add Traits. Each Species comes with multiple Species Traits, Ancestry Traits, Flaws, and Characteristics. When you choose a Species, you automatically gain all its Species Traits. You then select one Ancestry Trait and one Characteristic from that Species’ options. Additionally, you may choose to accept a Flaw, which grants you the option to select an extra Ancestry Trait.

Write This Down...

Write the name of your Species, along with the names, descriptions, and any uses of your Ancestry Traits, Species Traits, Characteristics, and Flaws (if any), in the “Species & Ancestry Traits” section of your Character sheet.

You can choose and write your Character’s name, then write their description, personality, and potential backstory in the Character details section. This can be done at any time.

Mixed Species. If you'd like to mix traits from two Species instead of choosing just one, follow these steps:

Set Your Physical Traits. Determine your Character’s Size, Height, Weight, and Age by averaging the typical ranges of the two chosen Species. Then, select a size option from one of the Species. You can adjust these values or customize them further to align with your Character’s backstory.

Select Species Traits. Choose one Species Trait from each Species.

Pick an Ancestry Trait. Select one Ancestry Trait from one of your chosen Species.

Optional: Take a Flaw for Additional Ancestry Traits. If you choose to take a Flaw from one of your Species, you gain an additional Ancestry Trait from that same Species. Flaws and Ancestry Traits must always come from the same Species.

Step 3: Determine Abilities

Now that you have a sense of your Character’s archetype and their specialties, it’s time to define their core Abilities. These Abilities form the foundation of your Character’s physical and mental capabilities and will influence their role in Combat, exploration, and interactions. Use a method below to create six values you can assign to your six core Abilities: Strength (STR), Vitality (VIT), Agility (AGI), Accuracy (ACU), Intelligence (INT), and Charisma (CHA).

Custom Ability Distribution. Assign points freely across your Abilities, ensuring the total equals 7 after all adjustments. You may reduce one or more Abilities below 0 to gain additional points to increase other Abilities. While distributing Ability Points, follow these guidelines:

Ability Maximum. No Ability can exceed +3 from point allocation alone at level one.

Ability Minimum. No Ability can be set to less than -2.

Negative Limit. The total of all negative adjustments cannot exceed -3.

Final Check. After assigning the six Ability totals, add them together. The sum should equal 7.

Standard Array Distribution. Instead of manually distributing points into Abilities, you can use one of the following, assigning each number to one of your six Abilities:

Basic Spread. 3, 2, 2, 1, 0, -1.

Skewed. 3, 3, 2, 2, -1, -2.

Even. 2, 2, 1, 1, 1, 0.

Randomized Distribution. If you want to introduce an element of chance into your Character’s Abilities, you can use this method to generate them. This is the only distribution method that can result in numbers above +3 or below -2. Follow these steps:

Roll for Values. Roll 1d8 and subtract 4 to generate a number. Write this number down.

Repeat. Repeat this step 7 times, each time generating a new number.

Remove the Lowest. After all 7 rolls, remove the lowest number from your list.

Check Total. The total sum of your Abilities must be between 6 and 8. If the sum is outside this range, repeat this process until you get a total within this range.

Assign to Abilities. Once you have a valid total, assign the remaining 6 numbers to your Abilities.

Ability Increases. As your Character advances in level, you will gain Ability Increases, allowing you to raise one of your Abilities by 1 point. Keep the following rules in mind when applying Ability Increases:

Increases Beyond +4: To raise an Ability from +4 to +5 (or higher), you must spend 2 Ability points for each additional +1 increase. When you first gain an increase, mark the Ability’s Half-Point bubble. Once you gain another increase, clear the Half-Point bubble to fully raise the Ability by 1.

Max Ability Limit: No Ability can exceed +5, unless specified otherwise by certain Feats or rules

Write This Down...

Now that you’ve determined your Ability values, assign each one to the corresponding Ability on your Character sheet. Be sure to consider where you want your highest value—typically, this will be assigned to your Power Ability or Martial Ability, depending on your Character's focus.

Player Tip

Vitality is an important Ability! It directly impacts your Character’s health, so be sure to consider that when assigning your Abilities.

Step 4: Build Your Archetype

Time to get into the meat and potatoes (boil em’, mash em’, stick em’ in a stew) of your Character! Now that you’ve chosen your Archetype, selected your Power and/or Martial Ability, picked your Species and Ancestry, and assigned your core Abilities, it’s time to dive into the real fun! This step is all about bringing your Character to life by building out their archetype and fully fleshing out their Skills, traits, and personality.

Since you’ve already decided on the type of Character you will create (Power, Martial, or Powered-Martial) find the section below that corresponds to your chosen archetype to learn what it grants your character.

Archetype Proficiencies

At level one, you have an Archetype Proficiency totalling 2. This number represents the combination of your Martial and Power Proficiency, even if one is 0. Using the Archetype you decided on in step one, allocate these 2 points to Martial or Power Proficiency, or 1 to both for Powered-Martial Characters.

Player Tip

You increase your Archetype Proficiency by 1 every 5 levels, so feel free to divide the points however you wish—you get more! But don’t spread yourself too thin. If you rely heavily on Martial or Power performance, don’t skimp on that Proficiency!

Write This Down...

Record the values you’ve assigned to your Martial and Power Proficiencies on your Character sheet. If either of these values is zero, you can simply leave that section blank.

Power Characters

You’ve chosen a Power character, and your primary Power Ability, now, to learn about and note what you gain as a Power Character.

Power Proficiency. This Proficiency is added to most Power attack and damage rolls, as detailed in Chapter 2’s Combat section, as well as your Power Potency, the passive Score used to overcome the effects of your powers. Set your Power Proficiency to 2.

Powers. As a Power Character, your main source of offense, utility, defense, and so on, is in the form of unique Powers designed especially by you to accomplish your various ends. Powers can take many forms and flavors, such as spells, potions, forces, and so on, and the method for using those Powers can also take unlimited forms and flavors, such as fantasy spellweaving, sci-fi telekenesis, modern constructions, and so on.

You’ll fully create Powers for your Character in Step 6: Equip your Character.

Innate Powers. These are Powers that can be used freely with no energy cost, and are essentially your go-to Powers for utility, offense, defense, and so on, without the need to expend Energy as with regular Powers.

You can have as many Innate Powers as you like, provided the total Energy cost between all Innate Powers is less than or equal to your Innate Energy and that no one of those powers has an energy cost above your Innate Threshold.

More details on Innate Powers, how to make them, and their restrictions can be found in Chapter 5: Powers & Techniques.

Innate Threshold. This is the maximum energy an Innate Power can cost while still being “Innate.” Powers with an energy cost higher than your Innate Threshold cannot be classified as Innate. Set your Innate Threshold to 8.

Innate Energy. Innate Energy determines how many Innate Powers you can have, as you can only have a number of innate powers with a combined energy equal to or less than your Innate Energy. Set your Innate Energy to 16.

Innate Pools. These help illustrate how many Innate Powers you could have if each one had an Energy Cost equal to your Innate Threshold. You can choose to have less than this value, though it isn’t recommended. Set your Innate Pools to 2.

Further details about the progression of Innate Energy, Threshold, and Pools are outlined in the Archetype Progression section of this chapter.

Martial Characters

You’ve chosen a Martial Character, and your primary Martial Ability, now, to learn about and note what you gain as a Martial Character.

Martial Proficiency. This Proficiency is added to most physical attack and damage rolls, as detailed in Chapter 2’s Combat section. Set your Martial Proficiency to 2.

Armament Proficiency. You can spend Training Points (TP) to gain Armament Proficiencies, which allow you to wield weapons and wear armor effectively. The total TP a single armament can require while still being able to wield with proficiency is called the Armament Proficiency Max or simply “Armament Proficiency.” Set your Armament Proficiency to 12.

Additional Archetype Feats. At level one, you gain two additional Archetype Feats.

Powered-Martial Characters

You’ve chosen a Powered-Martial Character, and each of your Martial and Power Abilities, now, to learn about and note what you gain as a Powered-Martial Character.

The sections below are covered in more detail in the Power Characters and Martial Character sections above; use them for referencing more specific details about the Power and Martial Aspects of your character. The sections below are meant to give you the proper values as a level one Powered-Martial Character.

Archetype Proficiencies. As a Powered-Martial Character, you have both a Martial and Power Proficiency. Set your Power Proficiency to 1 and your Martial Proficiency to 1.

Power Character Aspects. Below are the values assigned to you as a Powered-Martial Character at level one that relate to the Power Character aspect:

Powers & Innate Powers. See Power Characters above for more information on Powers and Innate Powers. As a Powered-Martial, how you use your Powers can vary from a full Power Character, such as by utilizing weapons or armor with your Powers.

Innate Threshold. Set your Innate Threshold to 6.

Innate Energy. Innate Energy is calculated as your Innate Threshold multiplied by your Innate Pools.

Innate Pools. Set your Innate Pools to 1.

Martial Character Aspects. Below are the values assigned to you as a Powered-Martial Character at level one that relate to the Martial Character aspect:

Armament Proficiency. Set your Armament Proficiency to 8.

Additional Archetype Feat. At level one, you gain one additional Archetype Feat.

Further details about the progression of Powered-Martials are outlined in the Archetype Progression section of this chapter.

Player Tip

You will gain one additional Archetype Feat or Innate Pool (With a +1 to Innate Threshold) every 3 levels, starting at level 4!

Write This Down...

Record your current Armament Proficiency, Innate Energy, and Innate Threshold on your Character Sheet. You don’t need to choose your additional Archetype Feats or Innate Powers right now, but be sure to remember that you can select them when you update your sheet with these details later.

Skill Proficiencies & Bonuses

You should already have proficiency with two Skills from your chosen Species. Additionally, at level one, you have 3 Skill Points to use to gain proficiency with Skills and increase Skill and Defense Bonuses, as outlined in Chapter 1: Playing the Game - Skills.

Try to select Skills that complement your strengths or help cover any weaknesses in your Abilities. A Character’s Archetype is not just defined by their combat prowess; it is the culmination of all they can achieve, including their Skills and other unique attributes.

Write This Down...

Write down every Skill you want on your Character sheet, regardless of proficiency. This makes it easy to reference common Skills and their associated Bonuses.

Be sure to mark the Skills you gain from your Species and this step as proficient and calculate your Skill Bonuses accurately based on the Skill Points you’ve allocated, whether they’re proficient, and the rules outlined in Chapter 1.

Picking Feats

It’s time to complete your Archetype with a unique set of features that reflect your Character’s style, talents, and personality. At level one, you gain one Archetype Feat and one Character Feat. You may have also gained additional Archetype Feats as outlined in Martial Proficiency above, so now is a great time to choose those.

Navigate to the Realms Codex, Section 3: Archetype Feats. Here, you can filter Feats by category, requirements, and specific tags to refine your search for the Feat(s) that best suit your Character. Repeat this step in Section 4: Character Feats, choosing a Character Feat.

When adding a Feat, ensure you meet all of its requirements first. The rules and mechanics for adding Feats are detailed at the end of this Chapter under “Feats”.

Player Tip

Since the lists are quite extensive, it’s a good idea to narrow your choices down to 3-5 Feats, pick your favorite(s), and remember the others for future levels.

Write This Down...

Write down the name of each Feat (a custom name that reflects how the Feat works for your Character is recommended!), its description (shortened or simplified if desired), the number of uses (both current and maximum, if applicable), and the Recovery Time to regain those uses (FR or PR).

Changing Feats. Before playing a session with a newly created or leveled-up Character, you can freely switch out Feats. However, once you’ve played a session of Realms with that Character, their Feats should remain the same unless your Realm Master grants an exception.

State Feats. The basic function of State Feats is to allow multiple Feats to be activated with the same Action, granting your Character the unique benefits of each Feat until the duration or “State” ends. These Feats operate according to a specific set of rules outlined at the end of this Chapter under “Feats”. Acquiring a State Feat works the same as acquiring Archetype or Character Feats, except that you will record it in the “State” section of your Character sheet or Feat list as part of a specific State.

Player Tip

Don’t feel pressured to take more complex Feats, like State Feats, just because they’re part of the game. Focus first on creating a Character that you’ll enjoy playing! You can always pick different Feats when you’re more comfortable.

Step 5: Fill in Details

You’re almost there! Now that you’ve made the foundational decisions for your Character and built upon them, it’s time to fill in the gaps and equip them with the tools they’ll need.

Write Down Values

One by one, record the following values on your Character sheet, renaming them if you wish.

Level. Record your starting level on your Character sheet. This is usually level one.

Experience. Almost always, a newly created Character will start with zero experience, even if they’re at a higher level than one. Experience resets to zero after each level increase.

Evasion. Record your Evasion, which is calculated as 10 + Agility.

Speed. A Character’s basic movement speed is equal to 6 + ½ Agility. This is measured in units of spaces or another unit as specified by the Realm Master, as outlined in Chapter 2: Encounters - Combat.

Attack Bonuses. Write down the Attack Bonuses for your Power, Strength, Agility, and Acuity-based attacks, as detailed in Chapter 2: Encounters - Combat. Ensure you include relevant Archetype Proficiencies and values for both proficient and non-proficient attack bonuses with weapons.

Training Points (Current & Maximum). Training Points are used to acquire proficiency with Armaments and create Techniques and Powers. At level one, you have 22 + Highest Archetype Ability. For each level after one, increase this by 2 + Highest Archetype Ability. Record this number as both your current and maximum Training Points.

Carrying Capacity, Fall Damage, Jump Distance. Refer to the Movement rules in Chapter 2: Encounters - Combat for calculations regarding your Character's carrying capacity, fall damage, jump distance, and other related factors. These values are not required to be recorded on your Character sheet but can be useful for quick reference. It’s common to note them in your Inventory or Character Details sections.

Energy & Health

At level one, you have 18 points to divide between Energy and Health. After that, you will add your highest Archetype Ability to your Energy and your Vitality to your Health.

Allocating more Health-Energy points into Health represents a higher ability to survive and endure, while allocating more to Energy reflects a greater ability to perform Powers and Techniques consistently or with greater effect.

Health. This value starts at 8 by default. Then, add your Vitality and allocate any number of your Health-Energy points to it.

Energy. Distribute the remaining Health-Energy points into Energy, then add your highest Archetype Ability to the total.

Player Tip

You may find that you want to adjust your Health and Energy totals before finalizing your Character, especially after creating Powers and Techniques. This is not a problem—feel free to modify these numbers as needed before your first session with your Character.

Terminal. This is a condition you automatically enter once your Character is at or below ¼ of your maximum Health. It represents your Character being close to death and badly injured.

Write This Down...

Health and Energy should be recorded with both a current and maximum value in a way that allows easy adjustments to the current value.

Record your Terminal value, and remember to update it as you level.

Player Tip

If your Vitality is negative, don’t worry! You only apply negative Vitality values to your Health once at level one, and not again during leveling.

Character Details

This is a great time to polish off your Character details by writing your Character’s name, physical description, gender identity, personality traits, flaws, bonds, and backstory. You may also want to refine your previous Archetype description and title or modify other aspects of your Character’s details.

As you do, take a moment to review your Character sheet to ensure everything looks as it should—you’re almost done! You may notice that your Character is still missing a few final tools, such as Powers, Techniques, and Equipment, but these will all be addressed in this next step.

Step 6: Equip your Character

A weapon is only as good as its wielder, and now that we’ve created the wielder, it’s time to add the weapon(s)! The first step is using Training Points to acquire weapon and armor proficiencies. Then, you can use Training Points to create and acquire Power and Technique proficiencies. Once that’s done, well, you’re finished! Your Character is ready to start playing.

Training Points

Training Points (TP) are resources that allow Characters to transform their experiences into useful proficiencies with Armaments, Powers, and Techniques.

Gaining Armament Proficiencies. You will spend TP to gain proficiency with Armaments—Weapons, Armor, and Unarmed Prowess—by investing an amount equal to the total TP cost of each of the Weapons or Armors’ Properties you wish to master. TP can also be spent to enhance your Unarmed Prowess. For more details on using TP for Armaments, refer to Chapter 4: Equipment, Crafting, & Downtime.

Armament Proficiency. The total number of Training Points a single Armament can have while allowing you to utilize the item with proficiency is called your Armament Proficiency and is tied directly to your Martial Proficiency, as shown in the table below.

Armament Proficiency

Martial Proficiency

3

0

8

1

12

2

15

3

18

4

21

5

24

6

TP is also used to expand your repertoire of Power and Technique Parts so that you can learn and add new Powers and Techniques to your Character. To add a Power or Technique to your Character sheet, you need to have proficiency with each part of the power or technique you are adding. Spend an amount of TP equal to each part’s cost and record the gained proficiencies on your Character sheet. For more details on using TP for Powers and Techniques, see Chapter 5: Powers & Techniques.

Equipment & Armaments

It’s essential for each Character, Power or Martial, to have the proper tools to accomplish their goals. Sometimes this is weapons and armor, but it can also include a variety of other equipment.

Acquire Starting Equipment. Your Realm Master will determine the amount of currency you have to spend on starting equipment. Typically, this is 200 currency, though the type and amount of currency may vary depending on the campaign.

Browse the items in the Equipment section of Chapter 4, selecting those you wish to add to your inventory. Deduct the cost of each item from your starting currency as you go. You may also choose to craft custom weapons and armor as described in Chapter 4, spending currency in the same way. Be sure to note any custom items on your Character sheet. Alternatively, you can select weapons and armor directly from the Armaments lists.

Write This Down...

When adding equipment to your Character sheet, ensure all relevant details are properly recorded. For weapons, note the total TP cost, range, damage type, damage dice, and weapon properties. For armor, record the total TP cost, damage reduction, and any other properties.

As you acquire Armament Proficiencies, make sure to list them in the Armament Proficiency section of your Character sheet. Additionally, reduce your current Training Points by the appropriate amount to account for the cost of these proficiencies.

Powers & Techniques

The most involved step of Character creation is typically designing custom Powers and Techniques. These are the key Actions a Character uses in and out of Combat to excel beyond basic methods, but they also require resources (usually Energy) to perform.

Where to Begin. Start by considering the most common Actions your Character uses to gain an edge in difficult encounters—these will be their go-to or signature moves. It could be as simple as a broadsword attack or as complex as teleporting while creating illusions. Regardless of complexity, focus on what these key Actions are and plan to incorporate them into your Power and Technique creation, shaping your designs around your Character's vision.

For Power Characters with Innate Powers, these types of Powers could always be available, similar to how a weapon remains accessible even when your resources are depleted.

Craft Your Toolbelt. Beyond signature moves or fallback routines, Characters will likely have more robust or complex Powers and Techniques that they’d perform. Once you’ve considered their basic or most important Actions, come up with two or three additional unique options for them to have. It’s wise for Power Characters to have Powers useful in Combat as well as in Skill Encounters. In contrast, Martial Characters should have a variety of Techniques to address a wide array of battle scenarios.

Write This Down...

When adding Powers and Techniques, record all relevant details, including the property proficiencies required/gained, Energy cost, range, damage type, and dice (if applicable), target defense(s), and other properties. List Innate Powers on the main page of your Character sheet for easy access, while other Powers and Techniques go in the Powers & Techniques section. Deduct the corresponding Training Points from the gained Power & Technique Part proficiencies from your TP total.

As you acquire Technique & Power Part Proficiencies, note them in the Proficiency section.

Level Progression

As your Character adventures, they will grow and become stronger. This growth is represented by earning Experience (XP). Each time you meet a certain Experience threshold, you reset your Experience to zero and increase your Level by one. If the Experience you gain exceeds the threshold, you instead reduce your Experience by the threshold value, and increase your level by one as normal.

The Level & Experience table lists the XP thresholds needed to grow from the current level to the next.

Level & Experience

Level

Experience

Level

Experience

1

4

11

44

2

8

12

48

3

12

13

52

4

16

14

56

5

20

15

60

6

24

16

64

7

28

17

68

8

32

18

72

9

36

19

76

10

40

20

80

The simple calculation is Level x 4 = XP Threshold.

Dividing Experience. After you complete a Combat Encounter or Skill Encounter and are awarded XP, the amount of total XP rewarded should be evenly divided by the number of participating Characters, and each awarded with that amount.

Rate of Progression. Leveling up should be fluid and tailored to your campaign. The RM may tie it to milestones or prepare the party for upcoming challenges. Unlike other RPGs such as Pathfinder or Dungeons & Dragons, Characters in Realms are generally expected to level up twice as often, or about every 4 Encounters.

Skill Encounter Experience

Players gain experience as they overcome difficult encounters such as Skill Encounters.

Difficulty. Skill Encounter difficulty is usually equal to an average DS of 10 + ½ Party Level, and a number of required successes equal to the number of participating Characters plus one.

Ave. Difficulty Score

10 + ½ Party Level = Ave Difficulty Score

Number of Successes

Number of Participating Characters + 1 = Number of Successes Required

Calculating Experience. After any Skill Encounter, participating Characters earn experience. To calculate the XP reward, multiply the party's average level by the number of Characters. Adjust this amount by 25% less or more for every 2 above or below the above-recommended DS your skill encounter was.

Awarded Experience

Party’s Ave. Level x # of Characters = Total XP

DS Experience Adjustment

Total XP × (1 + 0.25 × (DS Difference ÷ 2)) = Adjusted Total XP

Combat Encounter Experience

Like Skill Encounters, Combat Encounters also award experience calculated through defeating creatures.

Combat Difficulty. A balanced yet challenging Combat encounter typically involves the party facing enemies of equal numbers and levels. Adjusting difficulty is straightforward: increasing the enemies' level while reducing their numbers, or vice versa, naturally scales the challenge and adjusts the awarded experience accordingly.

Ave. Combat Difficulty

Number of Enemies = Number of Allies

Ave. Level of Enemies = Ave. Level of Allies

Calculating Experience. After defeating any amount of enemies, participating Characters earn experience. To calculate the XP reward, simply add together the level of all enemies defeated (whether through surrender, death, or being rendered incapacitated.)

Awarded Experience

The sum of Enemy Levels x 2 = Total XP

Level Progression Table

Each time your Character progresses to a new level, they will gain many different resources, allowing them to become more powerful, versatile, and fleshed out.

The total of what you have at each level is shown in the Level Progression table below. For Archetype-Specific leveling guidelines, use the Archetype Progression Table.

Level

Ability Points

Training Points

Health-Energy Points

Archetype Proficiency

1

7

22 + AA

18

2

2

7

24 + AA x Lvl

30

2

3

8

26 + AA x Lvl

42

2

4

8

28 + AA x Lvl

54

2

5

8

30 + AA x Lvl

66

3

6

9

32 + AA x Lvl

78

3

7

9

34 + AA x Lvl

90

3

8

9

36 + AA x Lvl

102

3

9

10

38 + AA x Lvl

114

3

10

10

40 + AA x Lvl

126

4

11

10

42 + AA x Lvl

138

4

12

11

44 + AA x Lvl

150

4

13

11

46 + AA x Lvl

162

4

14

11

48 + AA x Lvl

174

4

15

12

50 + AA x Lvl

186

5

16

12

52 + AA x Lvl

198

5

17

12

54 + AA x Lvl

210

5

18

13

56 + AA x Lvl

222

5

19

13

58 + AA x Lvl

234

5

20

13

60 + AA x Lvl

246

6

Each Level. In addition to the items listed above, you gain or increase the following:

Increase your Training Points by 2 + Your Higher Archetype Ability.

Gain 3 Skill Points to spend on Skills and Defenses.

Gain 12 Health-Energy Points to allocate between Health and/or Energy.

Gain one Character Feat and one Archetype Feat.

Add Vitality to your Health total, unless it is negative.

Add your Higher Archetype Ability to your Energy.

You can choose the order in which you take these steps when leveling up your Character. Leveling up can occur whenever is most convenient for the party or as described by your Realm Master. It does not need to happen the moment your Experience reaches the required threshold—it can be postponed to the most opportune time.

Ability Increases. Remember, increasing an Ability above +4 requires two Ability Increases. Mark the "Half-Point" bubble next to the Ability with the first increase, then erase the bubble and increase the Ability with the second increase.

If you increase an Ability, be sure to adjust all other values that correlate to that Ability, including increasing Energy and Training Points by 1 for each level you are when increasing your highest Archetype Ability, or Health by 1 for each level you are when increasing Vitality.

Ability for Feat. Instead of increasing an Ability, you may choose to gain one additional Character or Archetype Feat.

Consult the Archetype Progression below to determine what you get for your archetype based on level, taking note of increases in Archetype Proficiency.

Archetype Progression

Below are tables outlining the progression of each archetype, with specific tables for Power and Martial Characters, and clarifying rules for Powered-Martial Characters.

Power Character Progression

Power Characters gain additional Innate capabilities as they grow in strength and experience. The Power Character Progression Table shows this progression as explained below:

Innate Threshold. The Maximum any Innate Power’s Energy can be while still being considered Innate. This is before any deductions to the Energy cost through feats or effects. This increases by 1 every 3 levels, starting at 4.

Innate Energy. Innate Energy determines how many Innate Powers you can have, as you can only have a number of innate powers with a combined energy equal to or less than your Innate Energy.

This equals your Innate Pools multiplied by Innate Threshold, and increases every 3 levels, starting at 4.

Innate Pools. These help illustrate how many Innate Powers you could have if each one had an Energy Cost equal to your Innate Threshold. You can choose to have less than this value, though it isn’t recommended.  This increases by 1 every 3 levels, starting at 4.

Level

Innate Threshold

Innate Energy

Innate Pools

Power Proficiency

1

8

16

2

2

2

8

16

2

2

3

8

16

2

2

4

9

27

3

2

5

9

27

3

3

6

9

27

3

3

7

10

40

4

3

8

10

40

4

3

9

10

40

4

3

10

11

55

5

4

11

11

55

5

4

12

11

55

5

4

13

12

72

6

4

14

12

72

6

4

15

12

72

6

5

16

13

91

7

5

17

13

91

7

5

18

13

91

7

5

19

14

112

8

5

20

14

112

8

6

Martial Character Progression

Martial Characters gain additional Feats as they grow in strength and experience. The Martial Character Progression Table shows this progression as explained below:

Bonus Archetype Feats. The number of additional Archetype Feats you gain at these levels. This increases by 1 every 3 levels, starting at 4.

Total Archetype Feats. The total number of Archetype Feats you have at each level. This increases every 3 levels, starting at 4.

Armament Proficiency. This is the maximum Training Points any Weapon, Shield, or Armor you utilize can have from its properties to be able to utilize it with proficiency. It increases by 3 every 5 levels.

Level

Bonus Archetype Feats

Total Archetype Feats

Armament Proficiency

Martial Proficiency

1

+2

3

12

2

2

-

4

12

2

3

-

5

12

2

4

+1

7

12

2

5

-

8

15

3

6

-

9

15

3

7

+1

11

15

3

8

-

12

15

3

9

-

13

15

3

10

+1

15

18

4

11

-

16

18

4

12

-

17

18

4

13

+1

19

18

4

14

-

20

18

4

15

-

21

21

5

16

+1

23

21

5

17

-

24

21

5

18

-

25

21

5

19

+1

27

21

5

20

-

28

24

6

Powered-Martial Character Progression

A Powered-Martial Character is more adaptable than the other Archetypes, as you can choose when you’d like to acquire more Martial or Power Proficiency as your Character progresses. A Character can become a Powered-Martial Character whenever they gain an Archetype Proficiency increase as explained below.

Becoming a Powered-Martial. When you would increase an Archetype Proficiency as a Power or Martial Character from 0 to 1, you become a Powered-Martial Character, and the following occurs depending on the Proficiency increased:

Power Proficiency. You gain an Innate Threshold and Energy of 6, and 1 Innate Pool.

Martial Proficiency. You gain an additional Archetype Feat, and your Armament Proficiency Maximum becomes 8.

Progression. At certain levels, you will be able to choose between different options in your Powered-Martial progression. They are illustrated by the table below, which is relevant whether you gained your second Archetype Proficiency at level one or a later level.

Every 3 Levels, starting at 4, from one of the following:

Increase Innate Power. When you choose to increase your Innate Power, increase your Innate Pool by +1, and Innate Threshold from 6 to 8, or, if already at 8 or above, increase it by +1. Calculate your Innate Energy by multiplying your Innate Threshold by your Innate Pools.

Additional Feat. Gain an additional Archetype or Character feat.

Every 5th level, increase either your Martial or Power Proficiency by +1.

Level

Increase Innate Power or  Additional Feat

Increase Archetype Proficiency

1

-

-

2

-

-

3

-

-

4

+1

-

5

-

+1

6

-

-

7

+1

-

8

-

-

9

-

-

10

+1

+1

11

-

-

12

-

-

13

+1

-

14

-

-

15

-

+1

16

+1

-

17

-

-

18

-

-

19

+1

-

20

-

+1

Armament Proficiency. Each character’s Armament Proficiency is simply determined by their Martial Proficiency, as shown in the Armament Proficiency table in Step 6: Equip your Character.

Feats

Feats are specialized attributes that grant your Character unique capabilities, enhancing their Skills, combat prowess, or Power. They offer ways to customize your Character beyond basic abilities, allowing you to tailor their strengths to suit your playstyle. Because Realms is a classless system, Feats are a major part of designing your Character's Archetype.

Requirements. To acquire a Feat, you must meet its specified requirements. These can include prerequisites such as specific Ability Bonuses, Skills, or conditions that must be fulfilled before you can choose the Feat. Additionally, you can only acquire a Feat if your level is at least twice that of the Feat’s level (with the exception of basic or “level 1” Feats).

If you gain the requirements for a Feat during the same level that you wish to acquire, you still count as meeting the requirements. This ensures that you can progress with your Character’s development without unnecessary delays.

Feat Levels. Feats are categorized by level, and when you acquire a Feat with a level of II or higher, it replaces the lower-level version of the same Feat. This system encourages players to grow stronger and refine their abilities as they progress through the game.

You may only acquire Feats of a level equal to half of your current level. For example, a Character at level 6 can acquire a Feat of level 3 or lower, while a Character at level 11 can acquire Feats of level 5 or lower.

Uses. Feats can have a set number of uses, which refers to the number of times the Feat can be activated or used per recovery period. The number of uses is determined by the Feat itself, specifying whether the uses are regained through a full or partial recovery.

If you have multiple Feats that regain their uses in the same recovery period and have the same or more number of uses, you may use them interchangeably. For example, if you have two Feats that regain 3 uses each per full recovery, you can choose to use them for each other's uses.

If a Feat includes uses for full recovery, you can use those uses for partial recovery uses of any other Feat on your list.

States & State Feats

Feats in the “State” category can be combined to create a unique Character "state," such as a rage, flow state, or dance of defense. States represent temporary effects that enhance your Character for a short duration.

Duration and Activation. The default duration of a state is 1 minute (10 Rounds) unless otherwise specified.

Activating a state automatically triggers all the state Feats included in it. The activation time for the state is determined by the longest activation time among the Feats in the state (e.g., Basic Action or Quick Action). By default, activating a state takes a quick Action.

Uses and Activation Limits. Each Feat with a limited number of uses has one of those uses consumed when the state is activated. If a Feat’s uses are depleted, it no longer activates with the state, but other Feats still are.

Customizing Your State. Each State is a combination of State Feats of your choosing, and with the flavor of your description.

You can choose which state Feats to activate when entering a state, as long as the selected Feats align with the "flavor" or theme of the state. This means when you activate a state, you can choose not to activate some of the Feats included in that state.

Ending a State. You can end a state at will without spending any Actions. Other ways States end include:

States end automatically if you enter the dying condition.

Certain state Feats have specific conditions that cause the state to end (e.g., breaking concentration or taking a specific Action). If one of these conditions is met, the entire state ends, including all Feats activated, not just the individual Feat.

Uses Per Recovery. You can activate States a number of times equal to your Archetype Proficiency per full recovery, even if some of the Feats included have more uses than this available. If you have more than one state, activating one expands a state's use across all states.

🎲 Roll-Tables

Random Character Roll-Tables

The tables in this section are designed to inspire various aspects of your Character, such as their species, archetype, and other details. Feel free to draw as much or as little inspiration from these tables as you like. Remember, rolling on a table does not mean you are obligated to use the result—it’s merely a suggestion.

To roll on a table, use the die indicated at the top of the table. Then, match the number you roll to the corresponding result in the table.

Species (d8). Roll for a species using the table below. If you roll "Mixed," roll twice more to combine the two species you get, re-rolling any additional "Mixed" results. These species are part of the base game, but additional resources may include their own roll tables—or you can create your own!

1d8

Species

1

Human

2

Elf

3

Dwarf

4

Orc

5

Dragonborn

6

Halfling

7

Mixed

8

Re-Roll

Archetype

The following tables are designed to help you determine various aspects of a Character archetype. If you’ve already decided on certain details, feel free to skip the corresponding tables.

Martial or Power Archetype. This table allows you to determine whether your Character will focus entirely on Martial Techniques, gaining Martial Proficiency and extra Feats; prioritize Powers, acquiring Power Proficiency and innate Powers; or blend the two in any combination.

1d4

Martial or Power Archetype

1

Martial Archetype

2

Power Archetype

3

Mixed Archetype

4

Re-Roll

Martial Archetypes. This is a table of the various different approaches to Archetype you may choose to take to your Martial Character.

1d20

Archetype

Summary

1

Bruiser

A powerhouse who relies on brute strength to dominate with crushing blows.

2

Martial Artist

A disciplined fighter who masters unarmed Combat with precision and fluidity.

3

Swashbuckler

A flamboyant duelist who combines agility, wit, and flair in Combat.

4

Assassin

A stealthy and precise Combatant who specializes in stealth and lethal strikes.

5

Archer

A ranged specialist with a variety of ranged Techniques and attacks.

6

Juggernaut

A heavily armored warrior who charges fearlessly into battle unyielding.

7

Skirmisher

A nimble combatant excelling in hit-and-run tactics and battlefield mobility.

8

Beast Master

A warrior who fights alongside loyal beasts, forming a symbiotic battle team.

9

Spearman

A polearm expert who uses reach and precision to keep enemies at bay.

10

Acrobat

A highly agile fighter who uses flips, rolls, and aerial maneuvers in Combat.

11

Barbarian

A wild and primal warrior fueled by rage, capable of incredible Feats of strength.

12

Wrestler

A close-quarters specialist who uses grapples, holds, and throws to disable foes.

13

Sentinel

A stalwart defender who protects allies and holds the line against attackers.

14

Gladiator

A versatile and showy fighter trained to excel in arena-style Combat.

15

Arcstriker

A combatant who specializes in long-range thrown weaponry.

16

Tactician

A strategic warrior who controls the battlefield with clever positioning and disability maneuvers.

17

Pacifier

A non-lethal fighter who disables or neutralizes opponents without killing them.

18

Cavalier

A mounted warrior who combines speed and power to dominate the battlefield.

19

Knife-Thrower

A specialist in throwing weapons with pinpoint accuracy and relentless speed.

20

Weapon Master

A versatile combatant skilled with a wide variety of weapons, excelling in adaptability.

Martial Abilities. This table can add a unique twist to your Character archetype by suggesting which Abilities to prioritize. Roll twice—first with a 1d6 for your primary (highest) Ability and second with a 1d10 for your secondary (second-highest) Ability. If you roll the same result twice, roll again. Your Character might become an archer who relies on strength and intelligence, a barbarian with a great personality and quick reflexes, or a tactician who is perceptive and charismatic but not necessarily the most intelligent.

1d6 - 1d10

Ability

1-2

Strength

3-4

Vitality

4-5

Agility

6-7

Acuity

8

Intelligence

9

Charisma

10

Re-Roll

Power Archetypes. This is a table of the various different approaches to Archetype you may choose to take to your Power Character.

1d20

Archetype

Summary

1

Wizard

A master of arcane knowledge who casts powerful versatile spells.

2

Warlock

A spellcaster who gains power from pacts with otherworldly entities.

3

Sorcerer

A natural-born magic user who channels raw, innate power.

4

Cleric

A divine servant who heals, protects, and smites with holy magic.

5

Necromancer

A wielder of death who commands undead and manipulates life forces.

6

Illusionist

A master of deception who manipulates perception and confounds enemies.

7

Summoner

A conjurer who calls creatures from other realms to fight by their side.

8

Enchanter

A manipulator of minds, using charm and domination to control others.

9

Artificer

A creator of magical constructs and enchanted items for combat and utility.

10

Elementalist

A caster who controls the primal forces of nature: fire, water, earth, and air.

11

Shaman

A wild and primal warrior fueled by rage, capable of incredible Feats of strength.

12

Psion

A spiritual leader who summons spirits and commands primal forces.

13

Druid

A protector of nature who shapeshifts and commands the forces of the wild.

14

Bard

A charismatic performer who weaves magic through music and stories.

15

Hexblade

A wielder of cursed weapons, channeling dark powers through a sentient blade.

16

Conjurer

A summoner of creatures and objects from other planes for aid in battle.

17

Witch

A practitioner of ancient magic who uses potions, curses, and rituals.

18

Diviner

A seer who uses magic to glimpse the future and uncover hidden truths.

19

Chronomancer

A manipulator of time who slows, speeds, and even rewinds events.

20

Blood Mage

A spellcaster who uses their own life force or blood to fuel powerful magic.

Power Abilities. This table adds a unique twist to your Character’s magical abilities, helping to shape their arcane or supernatural strengths. Roll twice—first with a 1d6 for your primary (strongest) Ability and second with a 1d10 for your secondary (second strongest) Ability. If you roll the same result twice, roll again. Your Character might become a wizard who draws power from intellect and charisma, a necromancer with a strong, acute mind and who pulls up the dead with strength, or a sorcerer who channels raw power through resilience and agility.

1d6 - 1d10

Ability

1-2

Acuity

3-4

Intelligence

5-6

Charisma

7

Strength

8

Vitality

9

Agility

10

Re-Roll

Power Flavor. The type of Powers you use can remain the same, even if their flavor changes. This table offers ideas for how you can customize or "reskin" your Character's Powers.

1d10

Flavor

Description

1

Artistic Creation

Powers shaped through visual art, such as painting, sculpture, or origami.

2

Nature's Essence

Abilities derived from plants, animals, or the natural world, channeling earth, flora, or flora.

3

Celestial Energy

Magic tied to the stars, moon, or divine cosmic forces, influencing fate and time.

4

Sound

Powers that manipulate vibrations and sound waves, from sonic blasts to sonic healing.

5

Emotion

Magic drawn from emotional states, affecting moods, manipulating feelings, or amplifying traits.

6

Mechanical

Powers that use technology, gears, or machinery to create constructs, defenses, or attacks.

7

Dreams

Abilities drawn from the realm of dreams, influencing minds, illusions, and reality.

8

Blood & Flesh

Magic tied to life forces, blood manipulation, and body transformations or enhancements.

9

Memory

Powers focused on manipulating memories, creating illusions, or altering perceptions of time.

10

Chaos

Magic rooted in unpredictability, randomness, or entropy, creating wild and uncontrollable effects.

🎒 Equipment, Crafting, & Downtime

Equipment, Crafting, & Downtime

An adventurer is only as strong as their skill, preparation, and the tools they wield. In the heat of combat, a suit of well-forged armor or a masterfully crafted blade can mean the difference between victory and death. In skill encounters, the right tools can turn an impossible task into a triumphant success. Beyond the battlefield, true power is forged in moments of preparation—brewing potent elixirs, training formidable beasts, or imbuing weapons with monstrous essence. Whether through craftsmanship, training, or strategic downtime, mastery is earned long before the fight begins.

This chapter equips you with the knowledge to master every form of weapon, armor, and tool at your disposal. It also serves as a guide to the many uses of crafting, resourcefulness, and downtime—whether forging new gear, refining your skills, or unlocking hidden potential beyond the battlefield.

Item Lists

You'll find a wide array of equipment, items, and armaments in the Realms Codex. Each entry provides essential details such as rarity, cost, descriptions, and other key attributes, serving as a quick reference guide for both players and Realm Masters when purchasing, crafting, or utilizing items in-game.

In true Realms fashion, you have the freedom to create custom equipment that aligns with your Character’s vision or modify existing armaments to better suit their needs. All of this can be done using the various Creators available on RealmsRoleplayGame.com.

Currency

Realms features a variety of currencies that can be tailored to fit the genre and setting of your world. In the base fantasy setting, gold is the standard, but other forms—such as silver, copper, or doubloons—may be used at the Realm Master's discretion. Regardless of type, currency is generally universal and recognized across most realms for trade and commerce, which can help ensure smooth transactions.

Whenever a Realms resource refers to the cost of an item, it uses the term "currency" as a flexible placeholder. This represents whatever form of wealth best suits the setting while maintaining consistent relative value across resources.

Rarity

The rarity of an item represents more than just how difficult it is to find—it also reflects its value, power, and significance within the world.

Common (0-99 Currency). Readily available items found in most settlements, including basic tools, weapons, and everyday goods.

These items are usually used by Characters from levels 1-4.

Uncommon (100-499 Currency). Slightly harder to come by, often requiring trade or specialized vendors. These items may have minor enhancements or unique properties.

These items are usually used by Characters from levels 5-9.

Rare (500-1,499 Currency). Coveted items that require effort to obtain, often crafted by skilled artisans or found in dangerous locations.

These items are usually used by Characters from levels 10-14.

Epic (1,500-9,999 Currency). Powerful and valuable items, typically requiring rare materials or extraordinary craftsmanship. Often limited to seasoned adventurers or the wealthy.

These items are usually used by Characters from levels 15-19.

Legendary (10,000-49,999 Currency). Items of immense power and rarity, usually tied to history, great deeds, or masterful craftsmanship. These are often unique or have special lore.

These items are usually used by Characters from levels 20-24.

Mythic (50,000-99,999 Currency). Almost mythical in nature, these items are nearly unattainable through conventional means. Often requires grand quests, divine intervention, or legendary craftsmanship.

These items are usually used by Characters from levels 25-29.

Ascended (100,000+ Currency). The pinnacle of artifacts, relics, or creations beyond mortal craftsmanship. These items are the stuff of legends, often tied to gods, ancient civilizations, or reality-defining forces.

These items are usually used by Characters from levels 30+.

Armaments

Armaments refer to the different equipment you will use to achieve success in battle, specifically weapons and armor. Armaments can take many forms and flavors as guided by your creativity and imagination. For a Martial Character, Armaments are essential for having basic combat prowess, which is why it’s encouraged that you design your own weapons and armor as discussed later in this chapter, but first, the definitions!

Armament Proficiencies

Proficiency with weapons, armor, shields, or unarmed attacks represents your Character’s ability to effectively wield or wear these items. Being proficient allows you to fully benefit from their Features without penalties. Gaining proficiency requires spending Training Points (TP) equal to the TP cost of each specific property an armament has.

Proficiency is not just about using a weapon or wearing armor—it also applies to utilizing special Features, like a weapon’s wide swing or finesse, without penalty. If you use an item without proficiency, you suffer penalties based on the item’s TP cost.

Weapon Proficiency

To gain weapon proficiency, you must spend Training Points (TP) to become proficient with each of the weapon’s properties and its damage type.

Proficient. If you are proficient with a weapon’s properties and damage, you can wield it as normal, as outlined in Chapter 2: Encounters - Combat. This means you add your full Attack Bonus to both attack and damage rolls.

Unproficient with Weapon Properties. If you wield a weapon without full proficiency in one or more of its properties, you suffer a penalty to attack and damage rolls equal to the TP cost required to gain proficiency with those properties. Additionally, any properties (e.g., Wide Swing, Finesse) with which you are not proficient cannot be used.

Damage Proficiency. Each weapon has a damage type (bludgeoning, piercing, slashing) and a damage amount (e.g., 1d8, 1d12, 2d8). These are collectively referred to as “damage.” When you gain proficiency with a damage type, you become proficient with both the type and amount (e.g., 1d8 bludgeoning, 1d12 piercing, 2d8 slashing).

You can be partially proficient with a weapon’s damage if your proficiency matches the type but not the amount. For example, if you are proficient with 1d8 slashing damage but wield a 1d12 slashing weapon, you are partially proficient.

Unproficient with Weapon Damage. If you lack proficiency with a weapon’s damage type (e.g., wielding a slashing weapon without slashing damage proficiency), you treat the weapon as an improvised weapon while still dealing its damage type. You can still use the weapon’s properties if you are proficient with them.

Partially Proficient with Weapon Damage. If you are partially proficient with a weapon’s damage, such as having 1d8 slashing proficiency while wielding a 1d12 slashing weapon, you can only deal damage up to the amount for which you have proficiency (in this case, 1d8 slashing). If your proficiency exceeds the weapon’s damage (e.g., having 1d12 piercing proficiency while wielding a 1d10 piercing weapon), you deal the weapon’s full damage (in this case, 1d10 piercing).

Write This Down...

Take note on your Character sheet of each property and damage type and amount that you gain proficiency with by notating the individual TP cost of those things in your “Armament Proficiencies” list.

Ability Requirements. Some weapons have Ability requirements, such as Strength 2 or Agility 1. You must meet or exceed the specified Ability to wield the weapon without penalty. If you do not meet the requirement, you may still wield the weapon, but you suffer a penalty to attack and damage rolls equal to twice the amount by which you fall short. For example, wielding a Strength 3 weapon with only Strength 2 results in a -2 penalty to all attack and damage rolls.

Unarmed Prowess

A Character’s Unarmed Prowess reflects their ability to use their body offensively, such as fists, elbows, headbutts, and bodyslams. At level 1, Characters can use Unarmed Prowess without proficiency, dealing half their Strength or Agility in damage and adding one-half the relevant Ability to attack rolls. You add double the relevant Ability instead if it is negative.

Gaining Proficiency. Spending 10 TP grants the base Unarmed Prowess proficiency, which can be recorded in the Character’s armament proficiencies. Proficiency with Unarmed Prowess allows you to add the full Attack Bonus equal to Strength or Agility plus Martial Proficiency. Every 4th level, you may spend 6 TP to increase your Unarmed Prowess damage proficiency by 1d2.

Unarmed Prowess Progression Table

Level

Damage

1

Ability

4

1d2 + Ability

8

1d4 + Ability

12

1d6 + Ability

16

1d8 + Ability

20

1d10 + Ability

Natural Weapons. Claws, horns, spiked tails, and fangs are examples of natural weapons. Natural weapons are simply weapons flavored as being part of the creature itself. Creatures with natural weapons must still spend the relevant TP to gain proficiency with their weapons’ properties. The key differences are ruled by flavor, such as the inability to be disarmed.

Armor

To gain armor proficiency, you must spend TP to become proficient with each of the armor’s properties and its damage reduction.

Proficient. If you are proficient with an armor’s properties and damage reduction, you benefit fully from it, as outlined in Chapter 2: Encounters - Combat. This includes applying full damage reduction and critical range increase and avoiding penalties to Ability rolls.

Unproficient. If you wear armor without full proficiency in one or more of its properties, you suffer a penalty to all attack rolls and physical Agility- and Strength-based D20 rolls, Scores, and Defenses equal to half the TP cost required for proficiency. Additionally, you must spend 1 extra Action Point to use any Powers or Techniques while unproficient. Agility- and Strength-based d20 rolls, Scores, and Defenses include Actions such as Evasion, Reflex, Athletics, and Might.

Ability Requirements. Some Armors have Ability requirements, such as Strength 2 or Vitality 1. You must meet or exceed the specified Ability to wear the armor without penalty. If you do not meet the requirement, you may still wear the armor, but you suffer a penalty to all attack rolls and physical Agility- and Strength-based D20 rolls, Scores, and Defenses equal to twice the amount you fall short. For example, wearing a Strength 3 armor with only Strength 2 results in a -2 penalty to all attack rolls and physical Agility- and Strength-based D20 rolls, Scores, and Defenses.

Shields

To gain proficiency with shields, you must spend TP equal to the TP cost of each of the shield’s properties and its damage reduction.

Proficient. Using a shield with proficiency allows you to make the Defend reaction to reduce damage from an attack. This involves rolling a Strength attack roll with your Strength and Martial Proficiency as the Attack Bonus. If your roll meets or exceeds the target attack roll, you reduce the damage by the shield’s damage reduction die result.

Unproficient. If you wield a shield without full proficiency in one or more of its properties or its damage reduction die, you suffer a penalty to Defend attack and damage reduction rolls equal to the half TP cost required for proficiency. Additionally, any properties (e.g., Base, Tower) with which you are not proficient cannot be used.

Ability Requirements. Some shields have Ability requirements, such as Strength 2 or Vitality 1. You must meet or exceed the specified Ability to wield the shield without penalty. If you do not meet the requirement, you may still wield the weapon, but you suffer a penalty to attack and damage rolls equal to twice the amount by which you fall short. For example, wielding a Strength 3 weapon with only Strength 2 results in a -2 penalty to all attack and damage reduction rolls.

Creating Armaments

A highly rewarding aspect of the game is crafting custom Armaments for your Character, whether it be a sleek dagger, a recurve bow, or wolf-skin armor. Simply conceptualizing an Armament costs nothing—your Character only takes action when they choose to purchase or gain proficiency with it. Creating and crafting are distinct: creating refers to designing potential Armaments out of game, while crafting is the actual in-game process of making them. Additionally, some items may be available for purchase if the RM determines they are common enough to acquire.

Armament Creator. Using the digital tool on the RealmsRoleplayGame website, you can design custom weapons, armor, and shields. Items with a rarity of common, regardless of complexity, can be forged or purchased for the price outlined during creation from most merchants who deal in such Armaments. However, availability and pricing may vary depending on the Realm Master’s rulings, especially for uncommon or rarer items.

Considerations for Armament Creation. The following are some simple rules to guide the creation of Weapons, Armor, and Shields:

Ability Requirements. When choosing to add an Ability requirement to an Armament, consider why it would make sense for the armament to require it. No Armament should have requirements of more than one Ability. Some Abilities make less sense for common Armaments and require that your RM approves of their utility and flavor.

Weapon Damage. No damage dice are added to a weapon by default, but you should always add damage dice. If you choose not to add damage dice, the weapon also cannot add any Attack Bonus to damage when hitting a creature, and thus can only be utilized for its other properties.

Consider Flavor. The weapon creation experience is meant to give you the freedom to be unrestrained by a set list of weapons and armaments, but you should also consider what makes sense for your character, the world, and the weapon itself. For example, a bow with a strength requirement may be able to knock a hit enemy backward, but a sleep rapier may not.

Other Equipment

Equipment refers to any physical item a Character can wear, wield, or utilize—typically something that can be carried in their inventory, bags, or other storage. This encompasses a wide range of items, from armaments and wands to firearms, potions, and more.

Enhanced Equipment

As you adventure, you’ll encounter or create unique items and equipment with enhancements that empower your Character and complement your build. Enhanced Equipment goes beyond the mundane, often imbued with supernatural properties, crafted with genius, or formed from raw power. Utilizing Enhanced Equipment is as simple as adorning your Character and experimenting with the item to understand its abilities.

Equipment Slots

Characters can only wear and reasonably utilize a limited amount of equipment, which is why they have nine equipment slots, in addition to two held-item or hand slots, each assigned to a specific type of gear. Below, you’ll find each type of equipment slot. Each slot represents only one item, unless otherwise specified:

Headgear & Hats. Items worn on the head, potentially extending to the lower neck. This can include masks but not eyewear. When enhanced, this equipment often holds powers affecting the mind.

Eyewear. Items that enhance vision, such as goggles, glasses, monocles, or visors. When enhanced, this equipment often holds powers related to acuity and sight.

Neckwear & Necklaces. Items worn around the low neck or extending to the mid-chest, including jewelry, chokers, scarves, and other neckwear. Enhanced versions of this equipment can hold a variety of powers, though often in a weaker or more specific form.

Cloaks & Capes. Flowing garments worn over the shoulders and back, sometimes with hoods. When enhanced, these items often grant powers related to movement, concealment, or protection.

Clothes. Garments worn on the torso and/or legs, including robes, tunics, jackets, and other outfits. These cannot be worn in addition to armor. When enhanced, this equipment can provide a range of powerful effects.

Armor. Leather, padded, metal, ring, or other material of armor taking up the outer layer of worn gear usually covering the torso, abdomen, and arms.

Gloves & Gauntlets. Worn on the hands, these range from delicate gloves to reinforced gauntlets. Enhanced versions of this equipment often provide versatile utility, frequently tied to enhancing actions taken with the hands.

Rings/Jewelry (2x Allowed). Rings, earrings, piercings, and other small accessories. While their size limits their power, they can hold a broad range of effects, offering nearly limitless versatility when enhanced.

Boots & Footwear. Items made of metal, leather, or cloth, covering the feet and sometimes the lower legs. Enhanced footwear often affects movement, defense, and stability.

Held Items (2x Slots). Weapons, shields, staff, wands, trinkets, utilities, and other useful items that can be held in one or both hands and are usable only while held.

A Character can wear all of this equipment, enhanced or not, at the same time, benefiting from each item's effects. However, it’s up to flavor and personal preference to decide if two pieces of equipment can’t be worn together, such as a hooded cloak and a top hat..

Multiple Equipment Slots

Some enhanced equipment contains a greater amount of power and potential, requiring more than one equipment slot. For example, a Character might find a metal helm that fully covers the head and extends below the lower neck, occupying both the headwear and neckwear slots but providing a powerful buff.

Consumable Equipment & Items

Outside of wearable enhanced equipment, there are many types of consumable items such as Energy and Health potions, traps, nets, poisons, power-infused scrolls, and so on. Characters can use and carry as many of these items as they wish, provided their Character has the strength and space to do so. Using items of this nature typically takes a basic action, but plenty of exceptions exist and will be specified by the item used.

The flavor of consumable items is virtually limitless - here are some examples:

Potions. Small containers filled with consumable liquid that grant benefits.

Poisons. Dangerous substances are created with the intent to harm, which may be inhaled, ingested, spread through wounds (perhaps coating a weapon), or even by contact.

Brews. More versatile than potions, brews can be used to affect an area of creatures, and do not require ingestion. They are often thrown and activated upon breaking.

Coatings. A type of bew often put on weapons or armor coating them, and granting them a temporary effect.

Power Stores. Orbs, scrolls, books, trinkets, or more, containing single-use powers ready to be used or learned.

Medical Items. Bandages, gauze, sutures, splints, and so on, used to heal and help the injured recover.

Enhanced Ammo. Fire arrows, acid darts, poison sling stones, fired from weapons or thrown with greater power than mundane ammo.

Items such as these can be crafted, bought, or discovered by you during your adventures, and can prove quite useful as quick solutions. Often consumable items and equipment are much more potent than their non-consumable counterparts - at the cost of only being able to be used once.

⚒️ Crafting & Harvesting

Crafting

The majority of Realms takes place in exciting adventures and epic quests guided by your party and illustrated by the Realm Master, but your Characters don’t stop there! Realms encourages parties to allow time for Characters to rest, recover, plan, live, and craft! This chapter will outline the basics of the Craft Skill, as well as the specifics of each Craft Subskill, and how to use them to craft a variety of equipment from the mundane to the enhanced!

Characters can craft basic or common items using the crafting rules, and can also spend more time and resources to craft enhanced items and equipment, provided they have the Skills, Proficiencies, and resources to do so. To enhance, or craft and enhance, a piece of equipment a Character needs proficiency with the related Sub-Skill.

The Craft Skill. Unlike the Craft Skill’s subskills, Craft has no specifically defined utility in the game. Instead, it serves as a versatile Skill, representing a general understanding of craftsmanship and the use of basic equipment, materials, and tools. Most applications of the Craft Skill occur during game sessions—rigging a snare or tripwire, securing a loose rope bridge, boarding up a gate before an oncoming attack, and so on. Subskills of Craft have both in-game utility and out-of-game or downtime utility, which we’ll soon delve into!

General Crafting Mechanics

Each Craft Sub-Skill has unique capabilities that allow creatures to create a variety of specialized items, enhanced or not. Generally speaking, crafting items requires time, resources with a set currency cost, and proficiency with the skill(s) involved.

Crafting an Item

Before you can craft an item you must have access to the proper tools, proficiency with the correct crafting Sub-Skill, and the resources required to craft that item. Beyond simply having a skill and rolling some dice, you can also expend effort collecting resources, upgrading toolsets and skills, and so on in and out of session time to enhance the level of your crafting. The basic rules are outlined in this section, with additional options for more advanced crafting found at the end.

General Crafting Process. With the proper tools and implements, skills, and resources, you can craft an item. The item you craft’s value will help you determine the time required to craft that item, which can be done all at once or in different chunks of time. In addition, this cost will have a corresponding Difficulty Score.

Crafting Sub-Skills

The type of item you craft will have a corresponding Sub-Skill, as well as a corresponding set of tools and crafting implements that you should have on hand and be proficient with to craft. Each of the crafting Sub-Skills can be found in the Realms Codex, Skills section. The Codex outlines what each Sub-Skill can specifically craft and the required implements. Each Sub-Skill functions slightly differently, but the general crafting rules are outlined in this section.

Crafting Steps

General crafting follows these specific steps:

Choose an Item to Craft. Select the item you wish to craft.

Determine Requirements. Identify the necessary skills, tools, and resources.

Gather Resources. Acquire the materials needed for crafting.

Craft the Item. Use your resources, skills, and time to complete the creation.

Step 1: Choose an Item to Craft

Look through the item lists in the Realms Codex and choose which item you’d like to craft. It’s important to note the item’s Currency Cost as that will help you determine the requirements to craft in the next step.

Ensure the type of item you plan to craft is one which you have the proper Craft Sub-Skill to craft, such as having glassblowing for eyewear or smithing for armor with a strength requirement. Each Sub-Skill outlines what item types they can craft.

Step 2: Determine Requirements

There are three main resources that crafting requires: Currency, Time, and Skill (represented by a Difficulty Score and Successes). Outside of these three resources, crafting also requires the proper tools and implements as outlined by each Craft Sub-Skill in the Realms Codex such as a forge for Smithing, or a tailoring kit for Tailoring. Use the crafting table to cross-reference the Currency Cost of your item with the appropriate Time and Difficulty Score needed to craft it.

Crafting Table. The table below gives the brackets for items based on their Currency Cost which ultimately determines the item’s Rarity, the Difficulty Score to successfully craft, and the time required to craft.

Currency Cost

Rarity

Difficulty Score

Successes

Time

0-99

Common

14

1

8 hours

100-499

Uncommon

16

1

5 Days

500-1,499

Rare

18

2

10 Days

1,500-2,499

Epic

20

4

20 Days

2,500-4,999

Epic

22

5

25 Days

5,000-9,999

Epic

24

6

30 Days

10,000-19,999

Legendary

26

7

35 Days

20,000-34,999

Legendary

28

8

40 Days

35,000-49,999

Legendary

30

9

45 Days

50,000-64,999

Mythic

32

10

50 Days

65,000-79,999

Mythic

34

11

55 Days

80,000-99,999

Mythic

36

12

60 Days

100,000+

Ascended

38

14

70 Days

Currency Cost. The cost of crafting an item in Realms goes beyond simply having the necessary gold, silver, credits, or other currency. Instead, an item's price is tied to the rarity and quantity of materials required to craft it. Even if you possess enough currency, rarer items may still demand time and effort to gather specific ingredients. While common and uncommon items are typically available for purchase without additional effort, rarer goods often require extra steps, determined by the Realm Master.

The cost of crafting an item is 75% of its market price, meaning you must have materials worth this amount to complete the crafting process. The market prices for items are outlined in the Crafting Table above.

For more structured resource collection, you can use the optional Resource Gathering rules at the end of this chapter. Resources should logically reflect an item’s nature—for example, fine jewelry and armor require rare metals, while food and healing salves depend on proper ingredients.

Time. Crafting an item requires dedicated time and effort. A "day" of crafting consists of 8 hours of active work. Exceeding this daily limit typically results in exhaustion or other penalties, as determined by the Realm Master. To complete the process, you must have access to the necessary tools and materials for the entire crafting duration.

You may split crafting into multiple sessions, as long as the total required time is met. If circumstances allow, materials and partially completed items may be relocated or adjusted between sessions.

For consumable items, crafting time is only ¼ of the listed time in the Crafting Table. All other items require the full-time stated. Optional rules at the end of this section provide ways to reduce crafting time.

Difficulty Score & Successes. At the end of each 5-day period, or 8 hours for Common items, you must make a skill roll against the Difficulty Score determined by the Crafting Table. The number of successes is tracked similarly to Skill Encounters. Each Success counts toward the total required. Conversely, each Failure removes one Success or, if none remain, counts as a Failure instead. Successes can also cancel out Failures.

At the end of the entire crafting period, the total number of Successes must meet or exceed the required amount to successfully complete the item. Falling short of the required Successes, or exceeding them, can lead to heightened positive or negative consequences, as outlined in Step 4.

Step 3: Gather Resources

Since you have determined the required resources it’s now time to gather and prepare those resources!

Downtime. Your Realm Master should specify how much downtime you have between in-game events, or they can provide this information upon request. It’s important to communicate with your Realm Master when you want more time to craft so they can integrate downtime into the story. If you plan to craft in sessions rather than all at once, make sure you know where each crafting session will take place and how much time you’ll have for it.

Adventuring life can be chaotic and unpredictable, so it may not always be possible to plan, but having a clear idea of when and where you’ll craft can help ensure you take advantage of available time.

Implements & Tools. The required tools and implements for crafting are not included in the currency cost, nor are living expenses or other incidental costs. Because of this, it’s important to plan ahead and ensure your Character has access to the necessary resources. Make sure you have the proper tools, suitable locations (such as a blacksmith’s forge), and adequate housing during the crafting process. Often, you can find non-player Characters in the world who are willing to lend resources to Characters who have proven helpful or earned their trust.

Fulfilling the Currency Cost. For Common and Uncommon items, most materials can be purchased from local or specialized vendors. As long as you have the necessary currency and access to the proper vendors, you should be able to craft the item without issue. However, you must have materials worth 75% of the item’s market price in order to craft it. The Crafting Table displays the market price of items, not the material for crafting cost.

For items of higher rarity, or if the materials aren’t available due to a lack of vendors or supply, you can always gather the materials yourself or with your party’s help. Common sources for gathering materials include harvesting from forests, caves, mines, creatures, ancient ruins, and similar locations. More details on gathering your own resources for crafting can be found in the Gathering Resources & Harvesting section of this chapter.

Step 4: Craft the Item

Now that you have all the necessary resources and have set aside the required time, you can begin crafting your item. At the end of each 5-day period—or after 8 hours for a Common item—make a Skill Roll using the appropriate Craft Sub-Skill against the item's Difficulty Score. Track each success and failure, with successes canceling out failures where applicable. If, by the end of the crafting period, your total number of successes meets or exceeds the required amount listed in the Crafting Table, you successfully craft the item! Even if you fall below the required amount of successes, you can still make an item, but it will have flaws as shown in the table below and outlined by specific Sub-Skills.

Successes Table. Each success beyond or below the required threshold for crafting an item carries specific consequences, leading to either improved or diminished results. The general effects of these Successes are outlined in the table below, with more detailed and craft-specific outcomes provided for each Craft Sub-Skill.

Successes

Below (Failure)

Above (Success)

Meet Req. # of Successes

—

Create a fully functional item worth market price with no complications.

+/- 1

The item is worth 75% of the market price.

The item is worth 125% of the market price.

+/- 2

The item is worth 50% of the market price.

You retain 25% of the crafting materials you would’ve spent and the item is worth 125% of the market price.

+/- 3

The item is worth 25% of the market price.

You retain 50% of the crafting materials you would’ve spent and the item is worth 125% of the market price instead.

+/- 4

The item is worthless and doesn’t function as intended.

You retain 50% of the crafting materials you would’ve spent and the item is worth 150% of the market price instead.

+/- 5

—

You retain 75% of the crafting materials you would’ve spent and the item is worth 150% of the market price instead.

+/- 6

—

You retain 75% of the crafting materials you would’ve spent and the item is worth 175% of the market price instead.

+/- 7

—

You retain 75% of the crafting materials you would have used and can choose either to craft an additional identical item, both valued at 100% of the market price or to enhance the original item, increasing its value to 200% of the market price.

+/- 8+

—

In addition to the previous effect, you gain one additional item worth 100% of the cost for each success above 7 over the required successes.

This table applies to both general crafting and Enhanced Crafting (refer to "Worth of Enhanced Items").

Crafting Sub-Skill Successes. Crafting Sub-Skills can function similarly to regular skills, often used for appraising items, identifying crafting techniques, recalling methods, and related tasks. In these cases, Successes apply as usual, providing more or less information based on the roll as outlined by the Skill. However, Crafting Sub-Skills are distinct in that they have specific outcomes when crafting items, depending on the number of successes above or below the required threshold. These outcomes are specific to each Sub-Skill. Be sure to reference both the Successes table and the specific Sub-Skill descriptions in the Codex to fully understand the results of your crafting attempts.

Selling Crafted Items. Simply because you know the worth of an item, doesn’t mean you will be able to successfully sell it for it’s fair price. Depending on the situation, such as whether or not you’re a trusted adventurer or craftsperson, how established you are in a community, and how well you’re able to haggle, you may be able to sell an item for much less than its value, or perhaps much more.

Enhanced Crafting

Beyond crafting standard items, you can also create enhanced equipment using the same process and Craft Sub-Skills. Every Character with a Craft Sub-Skill has the potential to forge powerful gear, but the way they achieve this—and the appearance of their creations—is entirely up to you. A flaming sword might be enchanted with magic, or it could channel a volatile gas to unleash bursts of flame through scientific ingenuity.

Enhanced equipment represents more than just superior craftsmanship; it embodies supernatural forces, masterful engineering, or raw elemental power. As you adventure, you’ll discover and craft unique enhancements that elevate your gear, empowering Characters and complementing their builds.

Crafting an Enhanced Item

The process for crafting enhanced items is almost exactly the same as crafting regular items, but the process for determining Currency Cost is slightly different since these items will be customized and not based on existing parameters like item lists or the Armament Creator.

Crafting using Powers

Instead of simply finding an item to craft, you now have the creative freedom to imagine and design one, infusing it with your own unique power! You will still follow the usual crafting process with the same Skill requirements, but this time, in addition to the base item, you can incorporate your personal flair by using the Power Creation rules and mechanics.

To begin, follow the power creation process outlined in Chapter 5: Powers & Techniques to design a power you'd like to imbue into your crafted item. Once you’ve conceptualized your power, you must ensure you are proficient with each of the Power's Parts in order to successfully imbue the power within the item. Only once you have the necessary proficiency can you proceed to craft the item with your chosen power. This allows for deep customization and the creation of items that are not only functional but also deeply tied to your Character’s unique abilities.

Item’s Interactions with Powers. Powers imbued in items function exactly as they would if used normally, with the key difference that they do not require an Energy cost. However, to activate the power, the Character must have the item equipped in the appropriate slot.

This means the power still requires the same type of action to use, maintains its original duration, range, and targeting mechanics, and affects the same defenses as it would outside of an item. Essentially, the item acts as a conduit for the power without altering its fundamental mechanics.

Potency. The potency of any power imbued within an enhanced item is equal to the potency of the creator at the time of crafting. However, this potency can be improved through an upgrade process.

To upgrade an item's potency, the crafter must spend 25% of the original crafting time and material cost. Once upgraded, the item adopts the new potency of the upgrader. The Difficulty Score for this process remains the same as the original enhanced crafting attempt, while the required number of successes is 25% of the original requirement.

The upgrader must also be proficient in an appropriate Crafting Sub-Skill related to the item being enhanced. This ensures that only skilled artisans can refine and strengthen existing enhancements, further aligning the item's power with the growth of its wielder.

Archetype Proficiency/Ability Bonuses. Enhanced items that allow the wielder to use powers that deal damage or provide healing gain the same bonuses the creator would apply at the time of crafting.

Power Part Proficiency. To gain proficiency with power parts, you spend Training Points (TP) equal to the part's TP cost, including any TP level increases you plan to use. This allows you to customize your Character’s abilities, gaining access to more advanced or specialized powers by investing TP into the parts you want to master.

Write This Down...

Make sure you record any power parts that you are proficient in, including the parts level increases, if any, within your proficiencies, so you don’t forget them!

Energy Cost. When crafting enhanced equipment with imbued powers, you’ll need to consider the Power’s Energy cost, as it will determine both the Difficulty Score and the Currency Cost for crafting the item. Since these items are designed to store Powers permanently, the Energy required for the power will typically be much lower than that of a one-time-use power. This means you'll want to keep the cost manageable while ensuring the effect is precise and aligns with your desired outcome. Careful planning is key to balancing power and practicality when embedding powers into your crafted items.

Resources Required

The main resources for enhanced crafting remain the same as they do for regular crafting, with the exception that the item’s rarity and currency cost are instead determined by the imbued power’s energy cost.

Base Items. When crafting an enhanced item, you must first have access to a basic item to serve as the foundation, such as an unenhanced set of armor, a weapon, ammunition, or another relevant piece of equipment. Some enhanced items require only simple base components, like a glass bottle for a potion or a hat for a charisma-boosting accessory.

If you don’t already have the base item, you can craft it using the general crafting mechanics before applying enhancements with these specialized rules. Even if you envision the entire process as a seamless creation, such as imbuing a weapon with power as it’s forged, the mechanics still require both general crafting and enhanced crafting steps. Be sure to align your item’s context and function with the overall flavor of your crafting process.

For example, if you were creating an empowered shield with a gemstone affixed at its center that enhances perception, you would first craft the shield itself, then imbue it with the enhancement. You might describe the crafting process as a singular act of artistry and enchantment, but mechanically, it still follows both the standard and enhanced crafting rules.

Enhanced Crafting Table. This table provides the Energy cost required to imbue a power into an item, alongside its corresponding Rarity, Difficulty Score, required crafting time, necessary successes, and the currency cost per 1 Energy. The higher the Energy of the power, the rarer and more expensive the enhanced item becomes, reflecting the complexity and effort required to bind potent abilities into physical form.

Use this table to determine the exact cost and difficulty of crafting your enhanced item.

Rarity

Currency Per Energy

Energy

Difficulty Score

Successes

Time

Common

10

0-10

14

1

8 hours

Uncommon

25

11-20

16

1

5 Days

Rare

50

21-30

18

2

10 Days

Epic

71

31-35

20

4

20 Days

Epic

125

36-40

22

5

25 Days

Epic

222

41-45

24

6

30 Days

Legendary

363

46-55

26

7

35 Days

Legendary

583

56-60

28

8

40 Days

Legendary

692

61-65

30

9

45 Days

Mythic

866

66-75

32

10

50 Days

Mythic

1,000

76-80

34

11

55 Days

Mythic

1,176

81-85

36

12

60 Days

Ascended

1,300

86+

38

14

70 Days

Use the Table to Craft. Using the Energy cost of the power you’re imbuing into the item, you can cross-reference the required crafting time, the difficulty score, and the number of successes needed over that time. Then, multiply the Energy cost by the Currency Per Energy amount to determine the total currency required for crafting.

With everything set, it’s time to start crafting! Roll against the Difficulty Score as many times as the required number of successes, spacing out the rolls evenly over the crafting period. For example, if crafting takes 20 days and requires 4 successes, you’d roll once every 5 days. This will usually equate to 1 roll every 5 crafting days.

Item Uses

Enhanced items can only activate their imbued power once per Full Recovery. If you'd like to create an enhanced item with more frequent uses, you can modify the energy cost to correspond with the desired number of uses and the specific recovery period you prefer.

Multiple Use Energy Adjustment Table. The table below provides the effective energy cost of an enhanced item, along with the corresponding number of Full or Partial Recovery uses. When creating the item, you must choose whether it utilizes Full or Partial Recovery, and this choice cannot be changed afterward. The adjusted energy cost determines what percentage of the power’s normal energy cost is used in the Enhanced Crafting Table to calculate resource requirements such as time, difficulty, and currency. This also influences the item's rarity classification.

Partial Recovery

Full Recovery

Adjusted Energy

X

1

100%

X

2

125%

1

3

150%

2

4

175%

3

6

200%

4

8

225%

5

10

250%

Permanent/Passive

Permanent/Passive

300%

Permanent/Passive Effects. An item with a permanent or passive effect continuously grants the benefits of the imbued power to the Character wearing or wielding it. Alternatively, instead of being always active, the item can allow the power to be used an unlimited number of times, requiring the appropriate action determined during the power’s creation.

Single-Use Items

Consumable enhanced items can take many forms, such as potions, power scrolls, or power gems, allowing for creative flavoring that suits your Character’s crafting style. Some Crafting Sub-Skills, like Alchemy or Calligraphy, are specifically suited for creating consumable items, so be sure to reference their skill descriptions and the Successes outcomes when crafting.

Single-Use Item Limitations. As the name implies, once you’ve utilized and benefited from the utility of a single-use enhanced item, you lose the ability to use it again. In addition to this more face-value limitation, single-use items have a few other limitations:

Duration. The duration of single-use item powers cannot be longer than one day.

Potency. The potency of a single-use item cannot exceed 25.

Flavor. The flavor of single-use items may limit their effect further, such as a poison requiring ingestion, but this can also be a stipulation in the Power, reducing the Energy cost.

Consumable Enhanced Crafting Table. Crafting consumable-enhanced items follows a different process from crafting basic consumables. Rather than reducing the time requirement, you will use the table below to determine the necessary resources.

Rarity

Cost Per Energy

Energy

Difficulty Score

Successes

Time

Common

5

0-10

14

1

2 hours

Common

5

11-20

15

1

4 hours

Uncommon

12

21-40

16

1

1 Day

Rare

24

41-60

18

1

2 Days

Epic

34

61-70

20

1

5 Days

Epic

62

71-80

22

2

10 Days

Epic

110

81-90

24

3

15 Days

Legendary

180

91-110

26

4

20 Days

Legendary

290

111-120

28

5

25 Days

Legendary

384

121-130

30

6

30 Days

Mythic

432

131-150

32

7

35 Days

Mythic

500

151-160

34

8

40 Days

Mythic

588

161-170

36

9

45 Days

Ascended

650

171+

38

10

50 Days

Crafting Consumables in Bulk. In addition to using this table for crafting consumable or single-use enhanced items, you may also opt to create consumable items in bulk by spending only the time and material cost of creating 3 consumable items, but instead creating 4. In these cases, you still must make the proper number of rolls and obtain the proper amount of successes that you would for 3 items, with the Difficulty Score remaining the same.

Worth of Enhanced Items.

Since you use Energy to determine the currency an enhanced item costs to create, you don’t actually know how much the item itself is worth to the market. Usually, selling common or uncommon enhanced items is possible in an everyday market, but for more rare items, you will have to find specific buyers, and it can prove to be more difficult depending on the world’s setting and item scarcity.

Determining Cost. To set a fair market price for an enhanced item, multiply the crafting cost by 125%, ensuring the final price doesn't exceed the upper limit of its rarity bracket. For example, if you spend 20 energy to craft a common item, you’d refer to the enhanced crafting table (where energy costs 5 currency per unit) and calculate a material cost of 80 (40 × 2). Then, multiply 80 by 1.25 (125%) to reach 100. However, since the maximum price for a common item is 99 currency, you’d adjust the price down to 99.

Additional & Optional Crafting Mechanics

In this section, you’ll find Additional Crafting Mechanics, such as upgrading already existing items, and harvesting resources for crafting, as well as Optional Crafting Mechanics, such as ways to decrease the crafting difficulty score.

Additional Crafting Mechanics

These mechanics are designed to help provide more flexibility in how you craft, allowing you to more easily incorporate crafting into your regular adventuring sessions.

Upgrading or Improving Items

Characters will naturally increase in strength, power, and experience as they adventure and level up. Upgrading items provides a way for their gear to improve with them. The rules for upgrading items apply to Characters and non-player Characters alike, so even if you lack the proficiency to improve an item yourself, you can still call upon an NPC’s help to do so!

What can be upgraded? Both General and Enhanced items can be upgraded, with the process for Enhanced items following the same steps—though you’ll need to estimate currency cost and market price using energy costs, as outlined in the Enhanced Crafting section. What can be upgraded typically hinges on the item’s nature or flavor. For instance, armor and weapons are commonly improved through improvements like rebalancing, sharpening, or hardening. Upgrading single-use items, such as potions, may pose more of a challenge, but it isn’t out of the question. With enough creative ingenuity, most items can be upgraded if you set your mind to it. Regardless of the item, though, you’ll still need the appropriate Sub-Skill proficiency and tools to perform the upgrade, as usual.

Cost to Upgrade. The cost to upgrade an item, in materials or currency, is based on the difference between the original item’s market price (using its initial value, not an adjusted higher price from successes that boosted its worth) and the market price of the upgraded version. As with other items, this cost might be in currency or specific materials, especially if the item is rare or becomes rarer.

To calculate, subtract the old market price from the new one, then take 75% of that difference; this is the material cost to upgrade. For example, if the original item was valued at 100 currency and the upgraded version is worth 200, the difference is 100 (200 - 100). Taking 75% of 100 gives you an upgrade cost of 75.

Paying for Services. Upgrading an item through an NPC typically costs 100% of the price difference between the original and upgraded versions. However, if you supply the materials yourself, you’d likely only pay a standard service fee of 25% for the upgrade.

Opting for NPC services offers benefits like not having to be present during the process and typically ensuring a successful craft with consistent quality.

Time Requirement. The time required to upgrade an item is determined by the difference in crafting times listed on the Crafting Table, based on the rarity and cost of the original item versus the upgraded version. For example, if you’re upgrading an item worth 750 currency to one worth 2,500 currency, and the table shows 10 days for the base item, and 25 days for the upgraded one, the upgrade would take 25 - 10 = 15 days.

Difficulty Score & Successes. The Difficulty Score for upgrading an item is the same as the difficulty score of the upgraded item, while the number of required successes is the difference between the successes needed for the original item and the upgraded one. For example, if you’re upgrading an item worth 750 currency (requiring 2 Successes) to one worth 2,500 currency (requiring 5 successes), the difference is 5 - 2 = 3 Successes needed.

Gathering Resources & Harvesting

An exciting part of crafting is often the adventures you’ll go on to obtain the materials you need for crafting! Perhaps it’s as simple as a skill encounter to gather potent herbs, or as advanced as slaying beasts for special fire-spitting glands. Whatever the flavor may be, the gathering resources and harvesting rules provide the rules on how to obtain resources. Material and resource costs for crafting will always be measured in terms of Currency Cost, even if it isn’t always straightforward how to sell or buy them for their explained “worth”.

Harvesting

Harvesting is a versatile skill that enables Characters to invest time and effort in gathering resources and materials. As a unique Sub-Skill, its base Skill and associated Ability can vary depending on the context and the type of harvesting being performed.

Characters can use Harvesting to forage for herbs, mine ore, gather crops, or extract useful parts from a creature’s body, among other resource-gathering activities.

Any number of Characters can collaborate to harvest resources, provided they have the necessary time and access to a suitable source. The quantity and quality of the gathered materials depend on several key factors:

Material Quality. The value of harvested materials varies based on their purity and condition. Rare gemstones, pure iron ore, or high-yield crops are more valuable, whereas impure deposits or withering plants reduce the overall worth.

Number of Successes. Harvesting requires a Skill Roll against a set Difficulty Score. The number of Successes determines the quality and quantity of the yield.

Harvesting Difficulty. More valuable or delicate resources present greater challenges. The Difficulty Score reflects the complexity of the task, such as extracting liquid from a natural source or carefully removing a rare organ from a formidable creature.

Harvesting Skill Encounters. Using the rules for Skill Encounters, Characters can invest time and effort into harvesting resources, applying creative solutions, and using unique skills to the task. Harvesting can take many forms, such as sequences that require multiple Skill Rolls to fully extract a resource, combat skill encounters where materials must be gathered under pressure, or competitive skill encounters where multiple parties race to claim limited resources.

There are rules set apart for a variety of Harvest situations, such as harvesting resources from the environment or harvesting resources from creatures, but there are also some basic rules that apply to all harvesting, such as the time you have to harvest.

Time & Resource Limitations. Time is often a limiting factor in harvesting, not only due to the time a Character has available but also because of external constraints. A creature may only remain fresh enough for a limited period before its valuable components degrade, and some resources simply take time to extract properly. Even if Characters manage to harvest an entire resource, poor skill rolls can result in waste, diminishing its utility, purity, or overall worth rather than just reducing the quantity gathered.

On average, harvesting takes between four and eight hours, depending on the resource. While RMs can adjust this timeframe as needed, most Harvest Skill Encounters fall within this range. This duration accounts for various factors, such as how long a creature's body remains viable, the available daylight for gathering, the time required to fully extract a resource, or even the sustainable limits of harvesting from an environment without disrupting local ecosystems.

General Harvesting

This section covers all forms of harvesting, including mining ore, extracting gemstones, and stripping an ancient palace of gold. While there are specific rules for harvesting materials from creatures and flora, these general harvesting rules can be applied to any type of harvesting if it is more convenient for the party and Realm Master. However, for creature and flora harvesting, using the specific rules provided is recommended.

General Harvesting Table. Below is a table that gives the general outline for how much maximum currency is available in the 4-8 hour time constraint, along with the currency obtained per each success, the rarity of the resource, and the harvesting Difficulty Score.

Rarity

Maximum Currency

Currency Per Success

Difficulty Score

Common

100

20

14

Uncommon

500

100

16

Rare

1,500

300

18

Epic

10,000

2,000

24

Legendary

50,000

10,000

30

Mythic

100,000

20,000

36

Ascended

Unlimited

50,000

38

Creature Harvesting

Creature Harvesting Table. Harvesting resources from a creature is represented in this table, factoring in the rarity of materials obtained, the maximum amount of harvestable resources within the standard timeframe of four to eight hours (expressed as maximum currency), the difficulty score of the harvesting process, and the currency gained per success—all determined by the creature’s level.

Creatures can provide resources for both basic and enhanced crafting, typically guided by flavor. While some creatures’ resources may yield specific utilities, the primary rule for determining what can be harvested and how it can be used is ultimately a matter of flavor rulings by the party and Realm Master. This type of interaction enables a party to plan targeted adventures in pursuit of specific resources needed for crafting particular items and armaments.

By identifying valuable materials and strategizing their approach, Characters can embark on expeditions to hunt rare creatures, gather exotic components, and refine their crafting capabilities, making resource acquisition an integral part of their journey.

Creature Level

Rarity

Maximum Currency

Currency Per Success

Difficulty Score

1/4

Common

25

5

11

1/2

Common

50

10

12

3/4

Common

75

15

13

1

Common

100

20

14

2

Uncommon

200

40

15

3

Uncommon

350

70

16

4

Uncommon

500

100

17

5

Rare

750

150

18

6

Rare

1,500

300

19

7

Epic

2,500

500

20

8

Epic

3,500

700

21

9

Epic

5,000

1,000

22

10

Epic

8,000

1,600

23

11

Epic

10,000

2,000

24

12

Legendary

15,000

3,000

25

13

Legendary

20,000

4,000

26

14

Legendary

25,000

5,000

27

15

Legendary

30,000

6,000

28

16

Legendary

40,000

8,000

29

17

Legendary

50,000

10,000

30

18

Mythic

55,000

11,000

31

19

Mythic

65,000

13,000

32

20

Mythic

70,000

14,000

33

Flora Harvesting

Plants, Flora, & Herb Harvesting Tables. You can spend time searching for naturally growing resources in a variety of locations and for many crafting purposes—for example, exploring caves for rare mushrooms and mosses, wandering forests for unique and potent flow-buds, or examining trees for lichens used in healing. Whatever the setting, herbs can be gathered using the two tables below. The first determines the currency potential based on the type of ingredient you are seeking, and the second provides a reference for the Realm Master to assign penalties and bonuses according to the relative fertility of the environment in which harvesting takes place.

Worth/Type of Flora for Enhanced Item Crafting. You may attempt to harvest flora of any rarity, regardless of the enhanced item you intend to craft. However, the minimum rarity of flora required for enhanced item crafting must match the rarity of the item being created.

Worth of Flora

Rarity of Flora

Currency Per Success

Difficulty Score

0-99

Common

5

14

100-499

Uncommon

25

16

500-1,499

Rare

75

18

1,500-9,999

Epic

500

24

10,000-49,999

Legendary

2,500

30

50,000-99,999

Mythic

5,000

36

100,000+

Ascended

10,000

38

Abundance of Flora Table. Using this chart, a Realm Master can determine how verdant the environment you are searching in is. Once environmental fertility is established, a corresponding bonus or penalty can be applied to all harvesting rolls made in that area. Overharvesting, as well as regional or seasonal effects, may reduce an area’s fertility over time at the Realm Master’s discretion.

Abundance

Bonus/Penalty

Desolate

-8

Infertile

-6

Sparse

-4

Meager

-2

Moderate

+0

Flourishing

+2

Abundant

+4

Bountiful

+6

Verdant

+8

Teeming

+10

Repurposing & Harvesting from Items

You can harvest materials from existing items by spending time melting them down, studying their craftsmanship, or repurposing their components. This allows you to reclaim materials from items you no longer wish to keep in their original form. While this process follows the general harvesting mechanics, it includes a few key differences.

Gaining Proficiencies. If you spend time harvesting materials from an item and achieve a number of successes equal to the item's Training Points (representing its power or complexity), you gain proficiency in crafting that item yourself. If you achieve fewer successes than the item's Training Points, you instead learn only partial components—either the simplest aspects or the ones you don’t already know—up to the number of successes gained.

Reduced Worth. Harvesting materials from an item typically yields resources worth less than the item's original value. The total currency value of harvested materials is reduced by 75% of the value shown on the general harvesting table.

Optional Crafting Mechanics

Upgrading on the Road. You might find yourself wanting to upgrade equipment during an adventure—say, after leveling up in a dungeon and earning Training Points to become proficient with a sharper sword’s edge or reinforced chestplate—even if you’re far from an ideal crafting setup. As an optional rule in such cases, you can upgrade an item as long as the rarity doesn’t increase or the market price rises no more than 50%, and the upgrade time required would be no more than 10 days.

These on-the-road upgrades are faster than standard crafting, but they require special single-use tools, which are costly and must be purchased beforehand. The materials needed mirror those for normal upgrades, though you can use any you’ve brought along. The Difficulty Score for this type of upgrade is the standard score for the item plus 5, and the crafting time is a minimum of 8 hours, preceded or followed by a full recovery.

Your Realm Master may tweak the rules for on-the-road crafting based on your surroundings. For example, forging in an enclosed space with a hot fire might risk choking you with smoke, halting the process entirely. Conversely, an abandoned workshop with usable tools could lower the Difficulty Score by making the task easier.

Reducing Crafting Difficulty

To make seemingly impossible feats of crafting more manageable, many craftspeople adopt various strategies. They may acquire finer tools, take extra time to work with greater precision, or use materials far more valuable than the final item to ensure its quality. These are optional rules that Characters can apply when crafting to reduce difficulty.

Spending More Time. To lower the Difficulty Score of crafting, you can extend the crafting time—spending 1 additional day for common items (or common to rare if the item is consumable) or 5 additional days for all other items. This reduces the Difficulty Score by 1 but increases the required number of successes by 1.

Spending More Resources. You can increase the crafting cost by 25% to decrease the Difficulty Score by 2. This can be done up to four times, doubling the total crafting cost while reducing the Difficulty Score by up to 8. However, this does not increase the item's rarity or final value unless it results in additional successes.

Finer Tools. The standard instruments and tools used for any Crafting Sub-Skill provide no bonuses to crafting rolls. However, finer craftsman tools can be found, purchased, or created, offering various benefits such as bonuses to crafting rolls, reduced crafting time, or other unique advantages. A common trend is that the rarity of a toolset influences the bonus it grants to crafting rolls, shown in the table below.

Rarity

Crafting Bonus

Common

0

Uncommon

+1

Rare

+2

Epic

+3

Legendary

+4

Mythic

+5

Ascended

+6

Beyond finer tools, you can also acquire superior facilities that provide additional crafting benefits. These may include an ancient forge powered by magma, a specialized glassblower’s workshop, or a prestigious high-society jeweler’s studio. Such facilities can grant bonuses to crafting in various ways, enhancing efficiency, quality, or success rates.

Reducing Crafting Time

You can accelerate the crafting process to complete it in a shorter time, but this comes at the cost of increased difficulty or higher crafting expenses.

Increasing Crafting Difficulty. By increasing the crafting Difficulty Score by 2, you can reduce the crafting time by 5 days and lower the required number of successes by 1. This can be done up to 5 times, for a total reduction of 25 days and 5 successes, but at the cost of increasing the Difficulty Score by 10.

For crafting projects that take fewer than 5 days, you may halve the total crafting time instead, though this does not reduce the required successes. This option can only be used once.

Increasing Crafting Cost. You can also reduce crafting time by increasing the cost. By raising the crafting cost by 50%, you can decrease the time required by 5 days and reduce the required number of successes by 1. This can be done up to 5 times, significantly reducing the time needed at the expense of higher costs.

For projects taking fewer than 5 days, instead of reducing time by days, you may halve the total crafting time. This option can only be used once.

Group Crafting

You can approach crafting like any skill encounter and enlist an ally to assist in the process. Allies can aid in crafting if they are proficient in the relevant crafting skill and if you have the necessary tools and workspace to accommodate multiple workers.

Allies contribute using the Help Dice system, rolling their crafting Skill or relevant Sub-Skill. If they are only proficient in the general Craft Skill but not the specific Sub-Skill, their Help Die size is reduced by half.

🌄 Downtime

Downtime

An adventure isn’t truly complete without all the exciting aspects that make up a full story. Some Characters might be expert craftsmen, skilled in animal companionship, or simply looking for a place to call home. Downtime introduces variety to gameplay and helps flesh out what Characters do between their epic exploits.

While crafting is already covered in detail in the previous section, this chapter introduces other downtime pursuits such as recruiting Companions, training skills and proficiencies, gathering valuable information, establishing and upgrading a home base, and preparing for future quests. These activities provide flavor, world-building, and long-term progression opportunities for players who wish to explore them.

Downtime is intended to enrich the game experience for those who engage with it, but not every player may find it appealing. For that reason, it’s a “get what you put in” system—entirely optional and tailored to each player's level of interest.

Time Requirement. By default, downtime is measured in 5-day increments. However, depending on the pace and tone of the campaign, the Realm Master may adjust this duration to suit the story. Downtime segments can be shortened to 3-day or even 1-day intervals to match the campaign’s flow and player needs.

Group Downtime. Party members may help each other with any downtime activity that gives an external reward. For example, a player looking to use the Criminal Activity downtime option to perform a heist can get their party involved, whereas a player looking to use the training downtime option to gain a skill point for themselves must make that effort on their own. When attempting to help in downtime activities, such as Study or Socialize, you may use the same rules outlined in the Helping section of Chapter 1: Playing the Game.

For downtime activities that require multiple skill rolls, you may treat them as a skill encounter with everyone involved, increasing the required successes by 1 for each additional participant.

Bonding & Training Companions

A Companion is any Non-Playable Creature or Character (NPC) that you recruit to work alongside you, following your instructions learned through earned trust, training, and mutual respect.

Companions can take many forms, including tamed wild animals, created constructs, allied Characters, summoned creatures, and so on.

It’s up to your Realm Master what type of creatures you are able to form a bond with, and they may require you to make additional Skill rolls or even participate in a Skill Encounter before you’re able to begin bonding a creature.

General Bonding Guidelines

Bonding requires 3 main things: Time, Skill, and Currency.

Time. The time required to Bond with a creature is equal to the creature’s level multiplied by 5 in days. Every 5 days, you will make a Bonding Skill roll as outlined in the next section, with the total at the end of the bonding period needing to be equal to or greater than the required number of successes to bond.

Skill. You must succeed a number of Bonding Skill rolls equal to the creature’s level times 2. Each Success adds to the total required, and each Failure reduces the Successes obtained.

The Bonding Skill roll Difficulty Score is equal to the creature’s level multiplied by 2 + 10.

Currency. The currency cost to bond with a creature represents different supplies to shelter, feed, construct, or otherwise care for the creature during the bonding period. The cost of currency is paid throughout the entire bonding process. Currency cost is represented on the creature bonding table and is adjusted by level.

After successfully completing the bonding process, the creature is considered your Companion and can interact in roleplay, Skill, and Combat Encounters as outlined in Chapter 2: Encounters.

Bonding Table

Creature Level

Currency

Time (Days)

Difficulty Score

Successes

1/4

50c

2

11

1

1/2

100c

3

11

1

3/4

150c

4

12

1

1

200c

5

12

1

2

400c

10

14

4

3

700c

15

16

6

4

1,000c

20

18

8

5

1,500c

25

20

10

6

3,000c

30

22

12

7

5,000c

35

24

14

8

7,000c

40

26

16

9

10,000c

45

28

18

10

16,000c

50

30

20

Bonding Skills

Depending on the nature of the bond, different Skills can be required as outlined below:

Animal & Beast Bonds. Bonding with an animal or other beast companion uses the Tame Sub-Skill.

Character Bonds. Bonding Non-Player Characters utilizes the Charm Sub-Skill.

Construct Companions. Building a construct uses the Tinker Sub-Skill or Arcane Skill.

Other Skills can be used depending on the situation and as approved by a Realm Master.

Player Tip

Having too many Companions can be a hindrance to a party. Remember that only two can participate in Skill Encounters, and that the more Commanding that occurs during Combat, the fewer Action Points each companion has!

Breaking up Bonding Periods

A bonding period does not need to occur all at once. Instead, it can be done over multiple different periods, provided the total number of time, currency, and  Successes required are all met by the end of the total time.

Bonding Skill Encounters

Although bonding with a creature is not typically a group effort, in some situations, a group can collaborate to help bond a single creature. In these cases, Characters assisting with the bonding who have the relevant skill can make a Bonding Skill roll every 5 days they participate. For each Success beyond the first, they can reduce the time required by 5 days per 5-day period.

Training Companions

Similarly to how you Bond a Companion, you can increase a Companion's level up to a maximum of half of your level through training that companion, which requires a similar concerted effort with Currency, Time, and Skill. The method for Training a Companion follows a pattern of comparing the current level of the creature to the next level, requiring spending the difference between the two in cost and time as described below.

Cost to Train. The cost to train a Companion from a lower level to a higher one, in materials or currency, is based on the difference between the Companion's current level and the next level on the Bonding Table.

To calculate, subtract the current level's Currency to bond, from the next one; this is the material cost to increase a level. For example, if the current level was 2, then the next level is 3, so the training would require the difference between the two, 700 for level 3 bonding, minus 400 for a level 2 bonding, giving a cost of 300.

Time Requirement. The time required to train a Companion is determined by the difference in bonding times listed on the Bonding Table, based on the current level versus the next level. For example, if you’re training a Companion level 1/2 to level 3/4, and the table shows 3 days for the current level, and 4 days for the next one, the training would take 4 - 3 = 1 day.

Difficulty Score & Successes. The Difficulty Score for training a Companion is the same as the Difficulty Score of the higher level you desire to train to, while the number of required Successes is the difference between the Successes needed for the current level and the next one. For example, if you’re training a Companion of level 2 (requiring 4 Successes) to level 3 (requiring 6 successes), the difference is 6 - 4 = 2 Successes needed.

The Skill used for Training is the same that would be used for Bonding, as shown in the Bonding Skills above.

Training Skills & Defenses

With time and persistent effort, you can gain and improve Skills and Defenses using Training Points through a process called Training. The process of gaining proficiency can take many forms and may require finding a suitable trainer, environment, or resources before beginning. At the Realm Master's discretion, this process can be mediated through roleplay or Skill Encounters.

When gaining Skills through training, you do so by earning Skill Points in exchange and spending them on the desired Skill. This method also applies to Defenses, but increasing a Defense requires more resources, as each Defense increase costs 2 Skill Points.

Training Guidelines

Training requires an investment of Training Points, Time, Skill, and Currency.

Training Points. The Training Points required to gain a Skill Point with Downtime is equal to 6 Training Points per Skill point. If you wish to increase a defense by 1 instead, this requires 2 Skill Points, meaning the cost is 12 Training Points.

Time. The time required to train is equal to 5 days per 2 Training Points required.

Skill. A Training Skill Roll uses either the Skill or Defense being trained, even if non-instinctive.

You must succeed a number of Training Skill rolls equal to the Training Point Requirement. Each rolled Success adds to the total Successes obtained, and each Failure reduces the total successes obtained.

The Training Skill roll Difficulty Score is equal to the Training Points Required + 10.

Currency. The currency cost to train is equal to 75 per Training Point required.

Training Table

Skill Points

Training Points

Currency

Time (Days)

Difficulty Score

Successes

1

6

450c

15

16

6

2

12

900c

30

22

12

After successfully completing training with the correct number of successes, you gain the Skill Point (automatically allocated to the Skill or Defense being trained).

Criminal Activity

There are many forms of monetary advancement for those skilled individuals willing to stray off the beaten path. Whether through sleight of hand, stealthy infiltration, or a silver tongue, you can turn the fortune of fools to fortune of your own.

Criminal Activity Guidelines

Criminal activity will utilize your skill, daring, resources, and connections.

Choose your Skills. You will be required to make three skill rolls to reap the benefits, or suffer the consequences, of your exploits. Each of these skill rolls will use a different skill chosen from the Criminal Skills table below.

Choose your Difficulty. You will then choose a difficulty based on the required number of successes and the skill roll DS, the reward and risk increasing with each success and failure. Each attempt requires 3 successes with a DS 10 as a baseline, which can be increased to increase the reward. The base reward is 50 currency.

Choose your Investment. You may choose to spend money, take time, and/or call upon connections and favors to gain bonuses to your skill rolls. Using money represents the acquisition of specific tools, paying informants, hiring urchins as lookouts, etc. Taking more time allows you to investigate on your own and set up for the ideal circumstances. Calling on your criminal connections can mean bringing another professional onto the job or assembling a team for a heist. At your RM’s discretion, you may be able to call in a favor from one of your contacts, letting you gain the benefit without the cost. The Criminal Investment table below has the conversion rates.

Crime Difficulty Tables

Use these tables to choose how difficult a job you want to attempt. Adding to DS increases the base reward by a flat amount, while adding to the number of required successes adds to the reward multiplicatively.

Bonus

Required Successes

+0%

3

+20%

4

+40%

5

+60%

6

Currency Bonus

DS

+0c

10

+50c

12

+100c

14

+150c

16

Criminal Skills Table

This is a list of various skills and their possible uses in crime. Use it as inspiration when choosing how to perform your crimes. You’re not restricted to this list; you can bring an idea to your RM and use other skills with their approval.

Skills

Possible Uses

Stealth (Hide)

Use your skills to move quietly through places you aren’t allowed.

Sleight of Hand (Lockpick)

Use your expertise and tools to get into a locked place

Sleight of Hand (Pickpocket)

Use quick moves and misdirection to steal or plant items

Climb

Bypass protections through second-story work

Acting / Deceive

Lie to gain social advantage or to enter restricted areas

Charm / Persuade

Talk you way into restricted areas and out of tight corners

Persuade (Haggle)

Sell fake goods at outrageous prices

Forgery

Craft false documents to intimidate people or falsify your identity

Criminal Investment Table

This table shows the various ways you can get the edge in your criminal endeavors. These investments are in addition to the base costs of Criminal Activity.

Bonus

Time

Money

Connections

+1

1 Day

25c

-

+2

2 Days

50c

20% Cut

+3

3 Days

75c

-

+4

4 Days

100c

40% Cut

Arena Combat

In most cities, you can find work entertaining the masses with feats of combat prowess. Whether by brutal efficiency or flashy moves there is good money to be had in putting your body and pride on the line to entertain.

Arena Combat Guidelines

Fighting in the arena will test your combat prowess and ability to work a crowd. Your success and popularity will determine your earnings.

Choose a Weapon. The weapon, or Innate power, you choose will determine which ability you use for the fight. Additionally, your weapon or innate power will give bonuses based on its damage dice and properties.

Damage Dice. You will gain a bonus to your attack roll equal to half the TP cost of the damage. This includes TP spent gaining and increasing Unarmed Prowess. For innate powers, this includes Long-Linger damage and true damage.

Properties & Parts. You will gain a bonus to your Perform or Entertain skill roll equal to half the TP cost of your weapon’s properties. If you are using Unarmed Prowess, you instead gain a bonus equal to the skill points you’ve spent in Acrobatics or Athletics. If you are using an innate power this bonus is calculated with the TP cost of non-damaging parts in your power.

Choose Difficulty. Choose a difficulty from the Arena Difficulty and Crowd Engagement table below.

Determine Combat Prowess. Make an attack roll using the ability of your chosen weapon or Innate power, adding the bonuses outlined in the Damage Dice section above.

Determine Crowd Appeal. Make a Perform or Entertain skill roll, adding the bonuses outlined in the Properties & Parts section above.

Gain Popularity. After each combat, you will add 1 + any additional Successes to your Popularity Rank. As you increase your Popularity rank, your earnings will likewise increase as bets on you flow and you’re allowed into more prestigious arenas. How your Popularity Rank affects your earnings is shown in the Popularity table below.

Arena Difficulty

Use this table to determine the difficulty of your battles. Your RM may want to either randomize or set the difficulty for any given arena.

Attack Roll DS

Winners’ Cut

12

50c

13

75c

14

100c

…

…

Crowd Engagement

Use this table to determine the difficulty of the crowd, how hard are they to impress? Your RM may want to set the difficulty in any given arena

Performance DS

Betting Pool

12

2d4 x 5 C

13

3d4 x 5 C

14

4d4 x 5 C

…

…

Popularity

Popularity Ranks represent how well known you are. Use this table to determine how they affect your arena combat.

Popularity Rank

Winners’ Cut

Betting Pool

5

+10%

+1 Multiplier

10

+20%

+2 Multiplier

15

+30%

+3 Multiplier

20

+40%

+4 Multiplier

…

…

…

Working

Using your skills, you may work in the community of whatever settlement you happen to find yourself in. This ranges from grunt work to salesmanship in a curio shop to starting and running your own enterprise. Due to the wide range of needs found in any given town or city, you’ll likely be able to find work relating to any skill you have. Keep in mind that some quirks of a community may disqualify some jobs at your RM’s discretion, e.g., the townspeople are of a different religion, disqualifying your religion skill, or when playing in a low-magic campaign, there may be no use for the Arcana skill in a small backwater.

Work Guidelines

Working as a general laborer, you may use any skill, keeping in mind any unique features of your surroundings. If you choose to start a business of your own, you will need a working knowledge of the trade, the charisma to advertise your goods and/or services, and a reasonable financial investment. This option can be taken as a group. Due to the nature of each option, there will be a separate set of rules for each.

General Labor

Choose a Skill. Any skill can be used at your RM’s discretion, e.g., Athletics to move boxes and load caravans or ships, Persuasion to sell goods in a shop, Arcana to work as a research assistant, or use an instrument to entertain at the local tavern.

Make the Skill Checks. For each workweek spent, make three skill rolls with a required total of three successes at the end of the week. The skill check DS is 10 by default; extra currency gain is determined by the number of successes you achieve.

Collect Pay. At the end of the week, you will determine the amount of currency gained as outlined in the Workweek Pay table below. The currency amount listed below is in addition to your cost of living. Living expenses are covered by this activity regardless of successes.

Workweek Pay

Sucesses

Currency Gained

3

25c

4

50c

5

75c

Starting a Business

Many adventurers choose to establish sources of consistent income or other resources while not facing off against the forces of evil.

Gain Premises. Whether a market stall in a crowded shopping district or a building in the wealthy district, you’ll need a place to work. The quality of your premises will determine the maximum income and number of staff you can manage. The monetary and staffing capacity of each option, along with the cost for each, will be outlined in the Premises & Staffing table below.

Hire Workers (Optional). You may hire workers to help run your facilities, or even run the facility for you. If you have workers running your operations, you must keep regular contact with them, and you will only gain 50% of the earnings. When you are working directly with your staff, each staff member beyond the minimum required for your premises gives you +2 to your skill rolls related to running your business.

Choose your Goods and/or Services. You will have to decide what you’ll have on offer and how you’ll provide them. This will require some investment, which will be based on the rarity of your goods or the difficulty of the service you’ll provide. You must have at least 5 skill points invested in the skill or subskill associated with your chosen trade. If you choose to act in a middleman-type role, you may use persuasion as the associated skill.

Make Skill Checks. For every week you spend running your business, you must make three skill checks using Persuade, Haggle, Motivate, Craft or a subskill of it, or Intimidate. The DS for this check is in the Premesis and Staffing table. Remember, each staff member you hire beyond the minimum required for your premises gives +2 to this check.

The rules here outline a currency amount for each week. You may choose one type of item per 50c/week you produce and produce that value amount instead of C. For example, with a 100c/week income, you could produce 2 health potions and 50c/week, 4 health potions per week, or 2 health potions and 2 energy potions per week. This C amount can also be converted into ingredients matching the rarity of your goods, as shown in the ‘Starting the Business’ table. Once a product type is chosen, you cannot change it to another product unless you pay the appropriate cost from the ‘Starting a Business’ table below.

Premises & Staffing

Add blurb

Premises

C Maximum

Staffing Max

Staffing Min

Initial Cost

DS

Market Stall

50c/week

1

0

100c

15

Outlet

100c/week

3

1

500c

20

Small Building

200c/week

10

5

1,000c

25

Large Building

500c/week

30

20

2,000c

30

Starting the Business

Add Blurb

Buying Goods/Equipment

Hiring Staff

Rarity/Difficulty

50c

+10%

Common

150c

+30%

Uncommon

250c

+50%

Rare

Study

A strong knowledge base is essential for any adventurer looking to achieve greatness! Whether you’re a bookish technician looking to expand your pool of knowledge or a sensible knight honing your fighting style and learning the weaknesses of your enemies, spending time in a library or with a mentor can help you immensely.

Fragments of Wisdom

After exhaustive study on a very specific subject, you gain a fleeting insight into deeper truths. The rewards for this course of study are called Fragments of Wisdom. These are stored Successes with the ability you choose to use below, and can be used when you make a check using that skill to enhance a success or mitigate a failure.

Choose a Skill. This skill must reflect what you would like to study as it will be used in and gain the benefits from this activity.

Roll. Using the skill that you chose, using either Intelligence or Acuity instead of the skill’s usual ability. The DS for this check is 12 + 2 for each Fragment you already have from this downtime activity. For each Success, gain 1 Fragment for the chosen skill.

Take Notes. Possibly the most important step in every downtime activity, but crucial for this one. Carefully record which skills you gained Fragments for, and how many in each skill.

Guided Study

Working with a mentor, you may hone or refocus your talents and aptitudes. Mentors usually charge for their services, with a typical price being 75c for the workweek. However, your RM may offer opportunities for a mentor as quest rewards or story devices.

Note: You must have access to a mentor for this downtime activity.

Choose a Focus. This focus can be a weapon part, armor part, power part, or technique part.

Determine Bonuses. For weapon and technique parts, use their relevant ability + your martial archetype bonus. For armor parts, use Vitality + your martial archetype bonus unless the armor has an ability requirement, then, you may use that ability. For power parts, use your power ability + power archetype bonus.

Roll. The DS for this check is 15 + 2 x the TP cost of your chosen focus. On a success, you gain proficiency in your chosen focus. Alternatively, you may choose to lose proficiency in other areas and refocus the TP into your chosen focus without a skill check.

Socialize

In most societies, your wit and words can carry you far. Whether to gain contacts amongst the locals, gain the trust or faith of the masses, or dig up dirt on your enemies, your way with words can prove to be your most powerful weapon.

Network

Gaining friendly contacts is essential for adventurers. From gaining access to resources to getting important quests from important individuals any adventurer gains their share of contact throughout their exploits.

Choose a Profession. Decide what type of person you’d like to try forging a connection with. This can be a scholar, artisan, workman, sailor, ect. In short, any sort of person who makes sense for the settlement and setting where your downtime is taking place. If you’re having a hard time choosing, ask your RM.

Roll. Using the Perform or Charm skill, make a skill check against a DS determined by the skill and or station of the person you’re trying to connect with. If you’re interacting with an artisan or craftsman, you may use Craft or its related subskill with Charisma as the base ability.

Pick Your Reward. This can be determined between you and your RM or you can take an option from the table below.

DS Table

Add Blurb

DS

Station

Skill

10

Urchin

Workman

12

Workman

Apprentice

14

Merchant

Journeyman

16

Noble

Master

Reward Suggestions

Add Blurb

Profession/Station

Reward

Librarian

+2 bonus to Study downtime in this town, or a piece of lore related to your campaign

Smith

Access to a smithy and smith’s tools, or +2 to haggling or appraise when shopping for worked metal.

Criminal

Access to the criminal underground of the town (if any), or +2 to Crime downtime checks.

Noble

Access to high society, or some of their resources.

Merchant

+2 to Haggling skill checks related to the merchant’s wares, or the name of a person or location where you can purchase a specific item.

Grandstand

You spend your time amongst the people, learning their wants and worries, slowly gaining their trust and admiration by easing their woes or inflaming their passions. Every society is unique and will respond differently to attempts to enact large social changes; as such, we’ll only go into the details of entertainment.

Choose a Goal. Influencing large numbers of people is a tricky business; you and your RM will need to know what your goal is before starting.

Choose a Method. If you’re entertaining the masses, find a tavern, playhouse, opera, amphitheater, or street corner. Your popularity rank determines the availability of these locations. For other goals, discuss your options with your RM. The availability of these methods and locations can be influenced by your connections in the criminal underground, the nobility, or even with sympathetic merchants and workers, at your RM’s discretion.

Roll. For entertaining, make a skill roll using Perform or Entertain against a DS determined by your location as shown on the Entertainer table below. For other goals, roll a skill check using a skill and DS determined by your RM based on the social climate of the town you’re in.

Reap your Reward. If entertaining, your reward is listed in the Entertainer table below. Add +5 to the Reward multiplier for each degree of success achieved in the skill check. Otherwise, your RM will determine the reward or, if appropriate, consequence of your time spent. Have fun inciting revolt!

Gain Popularity. For entertainment, you’ll gain Popularity Ranks from each successful performance. You gain 1 Popularity Rank for each degree of success in each performance. If your character was an entertainer before becoming an adventurer, they start with a Popularity Rank of 5.

Entertainment Table

Add Blurb

Location

Popularity

DS

Reward

Street Corner

0

10

2d4 x 10c

Tavern/Amphitheater

5

12

4d4 x 10c

Playhouse/Opera

10

14

6d4 x 10c

…

+5

+2

+2d4c

Blackmail

Flavor Text

Choose a Target. The social standing of your chosen mark will determine the difficulty of the job, the time it takes, and the value of the secrets found.

Gather Information. Make a skill check using Decive, Act, Perform, Charm, Persuade, Intimidate, Calligraphy, Deduce, Insight, Investigate, Lockpick, Stealth, and/or Pickpocket. Each player participating in this activity must pick a different skill for each skill check in this activity. This will be a skill encounter that requires a minimum of three skill checks and successes. The DS for these checks is outlined in the Blackmail table below.

Choose a Reward. Sensitive information can be sold to information brokers or, in the case of criminal activity, the local guard; the price of your information is determined by the social standing of your target and the importance of the secrets shared. The price is outlined in the Blackmail table below. Alternatively, you can give this information to another individual to gain their favor and make a connection or as part of a deal. You may also choose to disseminate this information or use it to extort your target. For either of these options, you’ll need your RM’s participation.

Blackmail Table

Add Blurb

Target

DS

Successes

Time

Reward

Basic Merchant

12

3

1 Week

150c

Wealthy Merchant

14

3

1 Week

250c

Minor Noble

16

4

2 Weeks

500c

Aristocrat

18

5

3 Weeks

1,000c

Royal

20

6

4 Weeks

5,000c +

Trading

Every adventurer gets far more loot and treasure than they will ever need or use. Adventurers are also known for deep pockets and a penchant for expensive gear and deep pockets. This is where you can show off your riches and equip yourself for the next adventure.

Selling

You have more loot than money! What a tragedy…

Buying

You have more money than loot! What a tragedy…

Commissioning

You need something specific. Using your connections, you’ve found a craftsman who can meet your needs, for a price.

Note: You must have at least one connection in an artisans’ guild or among the nobility.

Gambling

You’ve made all this money fighting monsters and there is no way you’re playing it safe now!

Construction

What is this even for? What’s the goal?

Cultivation

Ingredients are expensive… good thing some can be grown! (This can probably be part of the “running a business” section)

Downtime Skill Encounters

There is an abundance of activities Characters can take up during their downtime. Each activity, which may result in potential gains or losses of resources over time, occurs through a Skill Encounter in which the Character makes Skill rolls to determine the outcome of those downtime activities. Some activities involve risk, such as gambling or crime, while others are relatively risk-free but potentially less rewarding, like working a regular job as a hired hand.

Add here: Bastions, Downtime Skill Encounters (Generic Skill encounters for thieving, selling, buying, searching, trading, gambling, research, construction, cultivation, working, doing crafts, optional rule: EXP gain in downtime, etc)

🔥 Powers & Techniques

Powers and Techniques

Welcome to the Powers and Techniques chapter! Here, you'll shape your Character's unique toolset—used to defend themselves, strike down foes, manipulate the environment, and bring your vision to life. Powers and Techniques offer a wealth of structured creativity, helping your Character embody your concept with precision.

These tools are more than just attacks. They're the signature ways your Character spends their energy to tackle combat and skill encounters in adventurous, memorable ways.

This chapter starts by reviewing the fundamentals of Powers and Techniques, followed by the general process for creating one. From there, you'll find a step-by-step walkthrough for crafting custom Powers, followed by their more advanced rules and nuances, and finally, the same for Techniques.

Powers

A Power is any ability your Character uses that consumes energy and applies their Power Ability to create an effect. Powers can influence enemies, allies, or the environment and are defined by the specific Power Parts that are part of them, and the desired flavor. Your creativity brings Powers to life: a bard charming enemies with enchanting music or a mime trapping foes in an invisible box are just two examples of how powers you might create.

Creative Freedom. The flavor of your Powers and Techniques is entirely up to you, within the genre of your campaign and your Realm Master’s discretion. Whether lulling enemies to sleep, poisoning them, or bending reality itself, the system’s flexibility lets you bring even the most unconventional ideas to life. The limitation to that freedom comes in the form of Power Parts, which are individual pieces of a Power that, when assembled and adjusted, can match the desired flavor.

For example, you may create a whirlwind power by adding a Control power part that moves enemies caught in the power, and a Slow power part that causes enemies to be slowed by the winds.

Genre. Ensure that your Character’s Powers and Techniques reflect the genre and setting of the campaign. Most Realm Masters understand the importance of preserving creative freedom, but it’s also worth considering how a power fits within the world’s tone and logic. For example, casting a fireball through a wand or dramatic gestures aligns with the conventions of a fantasy setting, while firing laser bullets from a gun may feel out of place. Choose powers that enhance immersion and reinforce the world’s thematic consistency.

Techniques

While Powers offer broad creative freedom, Techniques are more grounded but just as impactful. Techniques rely on physical actions or martial skills, often using your Character’s size, weight, and physical Abilities in Combat Encounters. A technique might be a sweeping kick to trip multiple enemies, a rallying battle cry to inspire allies, a flurry of unarmed strikes, or a focused hit with a hidden dagger.

Techniques are versatile but should fit the tone of your campaign. Avoid overly supernatural Techniques in more grounded campaign settings unless agreed upon by the Realm Master.

The Costs of  Powers & Techniques

Powers and Techniques are learned and gained in whatever way best fits your Character—their backstory, growth, and personal journey. Whether they honed their skills in solitude, learned from a mentor, or unlocked them through sheer instinct, it’s up to you.

Training Points. Training Points represent the time and effort your Character invests in learning, practicing, mastering, or even inventing the individual aspects of your Powers and Techniques, much like how one gains proficiency with weapons or armor properties.

Whenever you add a new Power or Technique to your Character sheet—whether it’s one you've created or chosen from a list—you spend Training Points to do so. The cost in Training Points corresponds to the sum of all the proficiencies required to use the Power or Technique, with most proficiencies ranging from 3 to 9 TP. This is often tied to how many or how complex the Power or Technique Properties included are, since each part has an associated Training Point cost.

A Character focused on versatility might choose to learn many simple or straightforward Powers or Techniques, while another might invest in fewer but more powerful or intricate Powers or Techniques that cost more.

Once added, your Character is considered proficient with every individual part of that Power or Technique, just as they would be with the properties of a weapon or armor.

Energy. Powers and Techniques always have an associated Energy cost. Unlike Training Points, which represent the effort it takes to learn a Power or Technique, Energy is what you spend to actually use it in the moment.

These Powers and Techniques aren’t typically limited-use—you can activate them as often as you have the Energy and the appropriate action available. Before using a Power or Technique, you must pay its Energy cost and ensure you have the right type of action to use it.

Energy cost isn’t based on complexity like Training Points. Instead, it scales with the potential strength or impact of the Power or Technique. The stronger it could be in an ideal scenario, the more Energy it costs.

Of course, “strength” is situational. A Power that grants unlimited flight may have a high Energy cost but be nearly useless in a narrow cave. A fireball might be devastating—unless you’re underwater. Even so, Energy costs are balanced around how powerful the ability could be when used under optimal or favorable conditions. For example, a technique that lets you spin and strike all adjacent foes, or a ball of acid that splashes multiple targets, is more expensive than a single-target version—even if you're only facing one enemy.

While Energy costs can vary, a good rule of thumb is that a moderately strong Power or Technique will cost around your level, multiplied by 5. A 3rd level Character, for instance, would usually spend 15 energy on a decently strong power or technique.

The amount of Energy you have is directly tied to your maximum Health since you divide Health-Energy points between the two each level. This means Characters who rely heavily on Powers and Techniques often trade survivability for versatility or impact.

Limitations. While you might envision a Character capable of slaying a beast with a mere glance, your Character’s current level may require that vision to unfold gradually. The ability to use high-cost Powers and Techniques may not be fully accessible until you’ve leveled up. That said, you can still bring your concept to life in its early form—perhaps through a powerful or intimidating gaze that deals magical damage or frightens a creature, even if it doesn’t result in instant death.

Power & Technique Creation

This section will briefly review the general process for making Powers and Techniques, then it will more thoroughly walk through the nuances of each in their own sections, including step-by-step guides on creating them and the specific rules and part interactions.

The entire Power and Technique creation process occurs in the Power and Technique Creator’s online at RealmsRoleplayGame.com

There are typically two ways to come up with the idea for a Power or Technique:

Visualize. The first approach is to start with a concept, picturing how it would function in gameplay, including potential effects. Then, you find the most suitable Parts to build the envisioned Power or Technique.

Get Inspiration. The second approach involves seeking inspiration for a concept. This could involve reviewing available Parts or pre-built examples to spark your creativity.

Once you have a basic idea, you’d determine the general mechanics of your Power or Technique, such as whether it integrates with a weapon attack or has a specific duration. Next, you’d add relevant Parts, adjusting their costs as needed to enhance their effects, duration, strength, and other attributes.

Through this process of adding, tweaking, and adjusting Parts and Mechanics, your creations will begin to solidify. The final steps involve writing a detailed description and giving your creation a name. Finally, you’d add it to your Character sheet, noting its Training Point and Energy costs, as well as other relevant details like range and duration for Powers, or the weapon used and damage for Techniques.

Creating Powers

This section will review the basic pieces that make up a Power, then it will go over the steps of putting those pieces together, and finally review more nuanced rules regarding the interaction of those pieces.

Mechanics

Power Mechanics are the core foundation that you build any power off of. If you think of a Power like a rocket, there is the payload, or what the power actually does, and then the thrusters, or what allows the power to do it, how high, how far, how long, and so on. Mechanics are the thrusters of a Power rocket.

There are two varieties of Mechanics, Basic and Advanced.

Basic Mechanics. These include simple adjustable options such as the range the Power can reach, the area of effect the Power targets, the duration of the Power’s effects, and the Action type the Power will use, such as Basic, Quick, or Long.

Most of these options have additional adjustable features, such as whether or not an area of effect remains for the duration of the power, whether you must Focus on the power to maintain its duration, or if the Action can be a Reaction.

Advanced Mechanics

These Mechanics are niche modifications that can specialize a Power significantly. Each category of Advanced Mechanics has a specific purpose.

Target Mechanics. These affect a variety of details relating to a Power's target, such as which Defense(s) are targeted by the Power, and exceptions or specifications about what types of creatures can be targeted (such as exempting allies or stipulating the inability to target constructs).

Duration Mechanics. These can create stipulations relating to a Power’s duration, potentially lengthening or shortening it based on certain conditions, such as ending the Power once a target has received a certain amount of damage or delaying the Power’s effect until a later round.

Action Mechanics. These mechanics can either alter the action required to use a power or allow the user to reuse the power with an action on later rounds, provided its duration has not ended.

Additional Advanced Mechanics. These are a mixed bag of other mechanics that can reduce or increase the Energy cost of a power while altering how the Power comes to form.

The Mechanics of a power have no Training Point cost, but can still increase the Power’s Energy cost.

Power Parts

If Mechanics are the thrusters of a rocket, then the Parts are the payload. Power Parts give the Power real in-game effects. These Parts suggest flavor, but that flavor is adjustable and ultimately up to you.

To utilize a Power Part, you simply need to add it to your Power. In general, the effects of Part apply to each Mechanic of the Power, meaning that Part can affect a target or area at the range specified by Mechanics, for the duration specified, and so on.

Part Categories. Power Parts come in a variety of categories, such as Charm or Adaptation. These categories not only help to designate the general function of a Power part, but they also help to understand a common targeted Defense if the Power is used offensively. For instance, a Control Power Part will often target Might as it attempts to move targets against their will, while an Illusion Part will often target Discernment.

Some categories are also mentioned specifically by feats that affect or take effect when using powers with parts within or only from that category.

Part Options. Some Parts have optional adjustments which you can make, often to increase the power level of that part, usually also increasing the Energy cost. For example, you may add a Darkness Part to your Power which causes a single level of Obscurity in it’s area. This Part has an option which allows you to increase the level of Obscurity by 1 for an increased Energy cost. This option can be increased up to a maximum of 3 for a total level of Complete Obscurity.

Part Cost. Each Part added to the power will have an associated Energy cost and Training Point cost.

Part interactions. In most cases, Power Parts don’t directly interact with one another; instead, they work together additively, stacking multiple different effects on top of each other, all affecting a single target or area of targets. More detailed information about when interactions occur can be found at the end of this section.

Power Creation Steps

Power creation follows these steps:

Decide on an Idea. Get an idea for your Power; its flavor and function.

Determine Mechanics. Adjust Basic and Advanced Mechanics to fit the idea.

Pick Parts. Pick the specific parts that will best embody the idealized Power.

Make Adjustments. Tweak the Power to fit your Character and Energy level.

Step 1: Decide on an Idea

Think about the types of Powers your Character might have in their repertoire, then focus on one specific idea. Alternatively, consider something you would personally like to be able to do, such as fly or teleport, and try to envision how it would work.

Inspiration for a Power can come from limitless sources. You might want to scroll through social media groups related to your Realms setting's genre for ideas, look through Powers created by the Realms community, or even simply begin building something and see what develops.

When creating powers, especially for lower-level Characters, consider their practical strength and the Energy required. While you might not be able to create world-altering powers immediately, that potential could be realized later!

Step 2: Determine Mechanics

There are three main Mechanics to focus on: Range & Area, Duration, and Action Type.

Range & Area. A Power's standard range is one space from your Character. Its default area affects either a single creature (if targeted) or one space (if the Power's duration extends beyond one round and no area of effect has been added).

You can increase the range in increments of 3 spaces, from 3 to 6, and so on, with each increase adding 0.5 Energy to the cost of the Power.

You can choose to include an area of effect when using a power. If the power has no range, the area of effect is centered on yourself or your current space. For powers with a range greater than one, the area of effect can be centered anywhere within the power's range.

Certain area of effect powers, like Sphere, originate from a central point and expand outward by a number of spaces, forming a radius. The size of this radius can be increased by one space for each percentage-based increment to the power's Energy cost. This additional Energy cost is calculated based on a percentage of the power's base Energy cost (the Energy cost before any percentage increases are applied). Each additional one space of radius added to the area will increase the Energy cost by an additional percentage.

Some Advanced Mechanics can be added, which allow you to specify which creatures in an area of effect are affected.

Duration. A Power's duration defines the length of time its effect persists, either within its area or on the individuals initially affected. The normal duration for a power is one round unless increased using Duration Mechanics.

Duration can be increased in terms of Rounds, Minutes, Hours, and Days. It can also be specified that the duration is permanent. Depending on the type of increment you use, increasing a Power’s duration increases the Power’s Energy cost by a set percentage of the Power’s base Energy.

A Power's duration doesn't inherently apply to all its parts. To make specific Parts, last for the stated duration, you must explicitly toggle them as lasting. For area effects, clarify whether the effect persists in the area for the duration or affects the initially targeted entities for that time within the description, and ensure to toggle the area of effect as lasting for the duration.

Focus & Sustain. Some duration mechanics can reduce the added cost of duration, such as the option to Focus or Sustain the Power throughout its duration.

Focus. Powers that require Focus last only as long as you maintain it. You can end Focus voluntarily, but it ends automatically if you enter the Dying condition or Die. When you take damage for the first time in a turn, you must make a Focus Roll. This is a D20 roll plus your Power Ability as a bonus. The result must overcome the Difficulty Score of 10 or half the total damage taken, whichever is higher, or you lose Focus. You can only Focus on one Power at a time.

Sustain. Powers with a Sustain requirement demand a specific Action Point cost each subsequent turn to remain active. If these Action Points are not spent before the turn's end, the Power ceases. The required number of Action Points for Sustaining a Power is determined during its creation when the Sustain requirement is specified.

Powers can require both Focus and Sustain, with both reducing the duration Energy cost.

Action Type. Powers typically require a Basic Action to use. However, you can use a Power as a Quick or Free Action by increasing its Energy cost by a specified percentage.

Alternatively, you can use a Power as a Reaction in response to a relevant triggering event you define. When using a Power as a Reaction, you are still affected by the trigger's effects unless a specific Power Part states otherwise.

Making a Power usable as a reaction increases its cost by a percentage, and this is in addition to any energy adjustments from changing the base action type. For example, changing from a Basic Action to a Quick Action incurs an Energy cost increase, and then further making that Quick Action a Quick Reaction results in an additional Energy cost increase.

Finally, you can choose to make a Power take a Long Action, which specifies the requirement of three or more Action Points to use. This decreases the Energy cost of the Power instead, and does so in increments related to how many Action Points are required. Long Action Powers may still be made into Reactions.

Advanced Mechanics. Basic Mechanics allow for the creation of numerous Powers, but the Advanced Mechanics provide more adaptability and fine-tuning for Powers. The latter part of the Creating Powers section will delve into Advanced Mechanics, explaining their function and how they interact with Powers in greater depth.

Finalize the basic mechanics of your Power in the Power Creator to align with your desired delivery method. The next step involves defining the Power's payload—its core functionality—using Power Parts.

Step 3: Pick Parts

With your delivery mechanism for your Power in place–its Mechanics–it’s time to create what’s being delivered.

Choosing the Parts for your Power involves several key considerations determined by your Power's function. These considerations guide your selection from available Power Parts and include: Type, Category, Target, and Tags.

Type. There are only two types of Power Parts, Basic and Decrease Parts.

Basic Parts are simply any Part that has an effect and a related non-negative Energy cost. For example, the Basic Part "Darkness" creates an area of light Obscurity and costs Energy.

Decrease Parts, on the other hand, reduce the Energy cost of a Power at the expense of a negative effect, essentially having a net negative Energy cost when added to a Power. For instance, the Decrease Part "Noisy" reduces the Energy cost of a Power but causes its use to be audible at a far distance.

Category. As explained earlier, a Part Category essentially sorts a Part into a relevant bundle of related Parts with similar effects. Charm Parts often work to tamper with a creature’s mind in some way, usually targeting Resolve, while Adaptation Parts instead work to adapt a creature for better or for worse, giving them buffs or debuffs and sometimes targeting Fortitude or another Defense.

When looking for Parts to add to your Power, certain Categories may be obvious to consider, such as the Illusion Category for a Part that makes a creature see something that isn't there. Other Parts may not be as clearly designated into a Category, such as a Part that lets you create water in the Create Category, or a Part that allows for animal speaking in the Utility Category.

Tags. Tags serve as the final way to refine Power Part searches. These specific keywords are linked to Power Parts and indicate their specialized function. For example, a Part enabling the user to locate a creature's trail might include "Locate" and "Track" tags. Conversely, a Part that disintegrates an enemy upon death by that power could have "Destruction" or even "Disintegrate" tags.

Unlike fixed categories, there isn't a defined list of Tags. Instead, they allow you to discover terms that might not be evident when searching solely by category or part names.

Picking the Parts. As you locate parts that interest you, add them to your Power. Try adjusting the various options of the Part to increase its effectiveness. Consider if you would like that part to have a longer duration or a larger area of effect. Use that information, along with the total Power Energy cost, to determine what adjustments to make as you finalize your Power.

Step 4: Make Adjustments

Now that you have a delivery mechanism and the core components (Power Mechanics and Parts), it's time to ensure it aligns with your Character's resources and to finalize its functionality.

The main aspects to ensure are balanced to your needs are the Power’s effective strength, Energy cost, and Training Point cost.

Power Strength. Consider the intended purpose of your Power and assess if it effectively achieves that goal.

For example, if your Power is meant to obscure an area with darkness, evaluate whether the degree of obscurity, the size of the affected area, and the duration of the effect are sufficient. A Power that creates a large area of complete darkness but only lasts for a single round might be ineffective as the obscurity dissipates too quickly to be of significant benefit. Conversely, a long-lasting effect that covers too small an area might also be ineffective, failing to provide concealment where needed in a given situation.

Weighing the different aspects of a Power before finalizing it can help ensure it effectively fulfills its intended purpose. Remember to design the Power to do only what is necessary, as each additional round of duration, space of area, or level of effect will increase its Energy cost.

Energy Cost. Consider how frequently you envision using a Power. If you intend for it to be an Innate Power, accessible at all times as a signature move or constant tool, its total Energy cost must be 6 to 8 or less for an early-level Power Character (depending on your Power Proficiency).

Alternatively, if you foresee using the power once per Encounter, aim for an Energy cost around half of your maximum Energy at most. For frequent use, consider a cost of one-quarter or less of your total Energy.

Maximum Energy Cost

The Energy cost of a Power cannot exceed (your Power Proficiency or half your Archetype Proficiency, whichever is higher) × 20.

Training Point Cost. It is uncommon for Powers Parts to cost more than nine Training Points each. If a Power's Parts cost starts to exceed this, consider whether each Part added is essential, or consider using other parts you already have proficiency in. Training Points often represent overall complexity, so a Power with a high Training Point cost could be overly complex, potentially making it difficult to describe or utilize during a session.

Write a Description. After finalizing adjustments to your Power Parts and Mechanics, describe how your Power functions. While the basic mechanics of a Power, such as its range, targeted Defense, and any potential damage, are defined in its quick-view summary, including some of this information in your description can still be helpful.

For instance, if you created a Power that inflicts the Slowed 1 condition on enemies within a wide area, you might describe it as: "Make a Power Attack roll against all creatures in a three-space radius centered within the Power's range. On a successful hit, the target gains the Slowed 1 condition."

Remember that this description serves not only for your own understanding but also to explain the Power's function to others.

To further bring your Power to life in the game, write a flavor description and give it a name. Following the previous example, you might add or alter it to read: “You throw a toxic mushroom, releasing purple lethargic spores in a three-space radius centered on a point within range…”

What’s Next? With your Power now defined, you can add it to your Character Sheet. Some interactions and aspects of Power creation might still be unclear. The following section, "Basic Power Guidelines," will address most of these questions, and the subsequent section, "Advanced Power Guidelines," will provide comprehensive answers to more nuanced features and interactions of Powers. Good work!

Basic Power Guidelines

These guidelines outline the rules governing the creation and use of Powers in Realms. Use this and the next section as glossaries to reference as you play and create. Memorizing every detail can be helpful, but it is unnecessary to get started.

Flavor Taking Form. In Realms, while specific rules govern gameplay, the intended flavor of an action or ability always takes precedence. Powers exemplify this concept of "Flavor Taking Form," allowing players to represent unique ideas through a combination of Mechanics and Power Parts.

For instance, one might describe an icy breath that slows targets, inflicts cold damage, and clouds their minds within a cone-shaped area. To accurately represent this flavor, the Power should include the corresponding Parts, such as Slow, Damage, and Mind Break, and the Mechanic Cone of Effect. This ensures that the in-game effects align directly with the descriptive flavor, moving beyond abstract interpretations to concrete rulings on how the described effects impact creatures.

General Rules

Below are the most common and important rules to know for Powers.

Power Potency. This is essentially your Power Attack Score or Difficulty Score. It is equal to your Power Attack Bonus + 10.

Energy Minimum. A power's Energy cost can never be less than 1. Innate Powers technically have an Energy cost, but this cost represents the relative strength a Power can possess while still being considered Innate, or free to use. Therefore, while Innate Powers are free to use, their Energy cost is not considered less than 1 during creation.

Energy Maximum. The Energy cost of a Power cannot exceed your Power Proficiency or half your Archetype Proficiency, whichever is higher, × 20. For instance, if you had a Power Proficiency of 2, the maximum energy your power could cost, before reductions from feats or other attributes, is 40.

Damage-Dealing Powers. When a Power deals damage, your Power Attack Bonus is added to the damage dealt. If the Power inflicts multiple damage types, this bonus applies to only one type, which you choose when creating the Power and should specify in its description.

The chosen damage type is considered the primary damage type for the purpose of applying this bonus. Any effects that add damage to a Power will also be considered this type of damage unless otherwise stated.

Healing. Powers that heal creatures deal increased initial healing equal to your Power Bonus, no matter how little the Power Heals. Innate Powers cannot heal.

Creation. Power Parts that create physical objects, water, or food have no set duration. These objects remain as if always a part of the world, unless otherwise specified by the Power.

Unseen Targets. Powers that Target Evasion or Reflex can be used against unseen targets suffering a -4 penalty, provided you know the general space(s) which the target(s) would occupy. Powers that target other Defenses cannot be used unless the target is seen. Area of Effect Powers can target creatures unseen within their area, regardless of what is being targeted.

Powers targeting other defenses cannot be attempted against unseen targets. If you feel the flavor of such a power would allow attempting to hit an unseen target, consider adding a Power Mechanic that allows targeting unseen targets.

Innate Powers

An Innate Power is a Power that requires no Energy to use and often becomes the “weapon” of Power Characters, since wielding actual weapons isn’t usually a viable option for full-Power Characters.

Innate Powers are also the essential toolbelt Power Characters have, which gives them a level of utility beyond that of Martial Characters.

Innate Threshold. An innate Power's Energy cost cannot exceed 6 with a Power Proficiency of 1, 8 with a Power Proficiency of 2, or 6 plus the number of times you’ve increased your Innate Energy (see “Archetype Progression” in Chapter 3: Character Creation & Leveling).

Number of Innate Powers. Characters have access to a number of Innate Powers equal to their Power Proficiency at level one; after that, they have a number of Innate Powers shown in the leveling table in Chapter 4: Character Creation. During Recoveries, Characters can change which Powers in their lists are Innate, provided they follow the same guidelines as other Innate Powers.

No Energy or Health Recovery. Innate Powers cannot cause you to recover Health or Energy in any way.

No Adaptation Parts. Innate Powers cannot have any Parts from the Adaptation Part Category.

Innate Action Type. Innate Powers cannot be any other Action type other than a Basic Action or Basic Reaction.

Innate Power Duration. Innate Powers cannot have a duration longer than one minute.

Innate Creation Limitations. Innate Powers cannot create any item or possession that has any actual material value, unless that creation only lasts for the Power’s duration. Any substances created by innate powers provide no sustenance and have no value.

Targeting Defenses

Depending on the nature of a Power, the individual making the Attack or Defense Rolls may vary. In any instance where a D20 roll is involved in a Power targeting a creature, the power's user makes a roll; however, the targeted individual sometimes also makes rolls.

The following outlines who rolls what:

Single Targeted Defense. When a Power targets only one Defense for all damage and/or effects, you make the Attack Roll against that Defense.

Two Targeted Defenses. When a Power targets two Defenses for all damage and/or effects, you make the Attack Roll targeting Evasion (if any) or the roll causing the stronger effect/damage, as determined by you during Power creation. The target then makes a Defense roll against your Attack Score for the weaker effect/damage.

Three or More Targeted Defenses. When a Power targets three or more Defenses for all damage and/or effects, you make the Attack Roll targeting Evasion (if any) or the strongest effect/damage. The target then makes Defense individual rolls against your Potency for all other effects.

Evasion & Reflex. When a Power targets a creature's Evasion or Reflex, the Power's user always makes the Attack roll against that specific Defense. If a Power targets both Evasion and Reflex, the user makes the Attack roll against Evasion, and the target makes a Defense roll against all other effects, including Reflex.

Area of Effect. When part of a Power would regularly target Evasion, but is made into an Area of Effect instead, that Part or those Parts target Reflex instead. If it targets another Defense and not Evasion, the attack is made against that other Defense instead.

All creatures within an area of effect are targeted by a single Power Attack roll made by the user against their Defenses. For example, using a cloud of poison gas in a sphere of effect would require the user to roll one Power Attack against the Fortitude of all creatures within the sphere, potentially overcoming some Defenses and not others.

Failing to Hit. If your initial Attack roll targets Evasion or Reflex and misses, the entire Power fails. The target is unaffected and does not need to make a Defense Roll, even if there is more than one targeted Defense.

Targeting Example. If a Power inflicts both the Blinded and Restrained conditions and deals 5d10 fire damage, the following occurs:

First, you make a Power Attack roll targeting the enemy's Evasion for the fire damage. If this attack hits, the target then makes Defense rolls (a D20 plus their relevant Defense Bonuses or Penalties) against your Power Potency to resist both the Blinded and Restrained conditions.

For instance, if the target rolls a 16 for Fortitude, has a +1 bonus to Fortitude (used to Overcome Blinded), and rolls 15 for Might with a -1 penalty to Might (used to Overcome Restrained), their effective roll against Blinded would be 17, and against Restrained would be 14. If your Power Potency for these conditions was 16, the target would successfully resist becoming Blinded, but would still be Restrained.

Duration

The default duration for a Power is until the end of your next turn, if used on your turn, or until the end of the turn used, if used on another creature’s turn, such as with Reaction Powers.

Adding a duration to a Power will only add a duration to Parts that you specify, and that do not already have specified durations. The cost of the duration is based on what parts are specified will last for duration and the duration they will last.

Not every Part of a Power need have duration applied, but only those that do will actually last for the duration.

On Self or Allies. When a Power with a persistent effect is used on an ally or oneself, the nature of the effect determines its application for the duration. For instance, if the Power enhances a specific Skill, the recipient gains a passive bonus to that Skill for the Power's duration.

Alternatively, if the Power is designed as a single-use ability, it allows the targeted ally to replicate the Power's effect during its duration, using the same Action Type that was originally used to activate it.

Area of Effect. If a Power causes an Area of Effect to linger, you can choose whether the Area itself retains the Effect or if the creatures initially affected individually retain the effect for the Duration.

If the area retains the effect, like ground burning after a fireball, targets entering the area for the first time in a turn or ending their turn there must roll the appropriate defense (e.g., Reflex) against your Potency or be affected by the Power, in addition to its initial effects.

If the effect remains on the targets, such as creatures igniting in flames, each target suffers the effect at the end of its turn if it hasn't overcome it. This occurs at the end-of-turn Ability Roll to Overcome, potentially allowing targets to avoid subsequent effects.

You must determine which of these two methods to use during the Power’s creation and note it within the Power’s description.

What Can’t Linger. Certain effects cannot benefit from increased duration. Damage, for instance, cannot last beyond the initial instance of damage unless the specific Long-Linger Damage Part is added to the Power, or if the Lingering damage does so only in an Area of Effect. The same is true for effects that replenish Health or Energy, unless a Part specifies otherwise.

Adaptation & Direct Harm. For Powers without Adaptation Parts or direct harm effects, the Energy cost of increasing their duration is reduced. When adding duration, ensure to enable this feature if your Power meets these criteria.

Power Ends on Use. One way to reduce a Power's duration Energy cost is to have it end once its effect is used. For example, a Power that grants +5 Strength for one minute could have a mechanic that ends the Power's effect immediately after the target makes a Strength Roll benefiting from the bonus, such as an Attack roll.

Overcoming Persistent Effects. Creatures affected by persisting effects other than conditions can attempt to end them at the end of their turn using their Overcome action as described in Chapter 2: Encounters.

If an effect modifies the outcome of future attempts to overcome other effects (e.g., weakness imposing a -1 penalty), successfully overcoming the modifying effect (weakness) will improve the subsequent rolls by removing or reducing its influence, even if done all using the same Overcome action.

Advanced Power Guidelines

Stipulations and Contingencies

These components add specificity, restricting Powers for benefits such as reduced energy cost. For example:

A Power only affecting undead.

An evasion boost that applies only against constructs.

The stipulation shouldn’t be too vague or broad, nor should it be something that only affects you.

Summons and Companions

Summons and Companions act independently but require commands:

Combat Commands: Spend a quick reaction to direct them.

Default Behavior: Defend themselves, follow you, and protect you unless commanded otherwise.

Actions: Summons have 4 AP per turn, -1 for each time after the first you use the Command reaction.

📖 Rules Glossary

Unfinished

Burning

A burning creature or object takes 1d4 Fire damage at the start of each of its turns. As part of a movement Action, a creature can extinguish the flames on itself by gaining the Prone condition and rolling on the ground. The fire can also be extinguished if the burning creature or object is doused with water, fully submerged, or the flames are otherwise smothered.

🌍 The Realms

Unfinished

| Each chapter can be referenced by opening the tabs to the top left of the page (or bottom if mobile). Double-click on a chapter heading to see that chapter’s sections. |

| Most chapters within this book discuss how to use the digital resources available for their chapters, such as the Power & Technique creator’s use is detailed in Chapter 5: Powers & Techniques. |

| First Die | Second Die | Resulting Dice |

| 1d2 | 1d2 | 1d4 |

| 1d2 | 1d4 | 1d6 |

| 1d2 | 1d6 | 1d8 |

| 1d2 | 1d8 | 1d10 |

| 1d2 | 1d12 | 1d8 & 1d6 |

| 1d4 | 1d4 | 1d8 |

| 1d4 | 1d6 | 1d10 |

| 1d4 | 1d8 | 1d12 |

| 1d4 | 1d12 | 2d8 |

| 1d6 | 1d6 | 1d12 |

| 1d6 | 1d8 | 1d6 & 1d8 |

| 1d6 | 1d12 | 1d8 & 1d10 |

| 1d8 | 1d8 | 2d8 |

| 1d8 | 1d12 | 2d10 |

| 1d12 | 1d12 | 2d12 |

| Round UpWhenever you get a fraction or decimal as a result of division, round up to the nearest whole number. If other calculations involve a decimal, complete all the calculations first and round up only at the end. |

| D20 Roll FormulaD20 + Bonuses + Penalties = Outcome |

| Player TipUsually, you will share the result of a die roll with the Realm Master, who will then determine and communicate whether you succeeded in Overcoming the challenge. This approach helps maintain the immersion of the experience by keeping the target numbers hidden. |

| Score Formula10 + Bonus = Score |

| Difficulty Score | Challenge | Difficulty Score | Challenge |

| 0-4 | Trivial | 20-24 | Formidable |

| 5-9 | Easy | 25-29 | Strenuous |

| 10-14 | Moderate | 30-34 | Overwhelming |

| 15-19 | Difficult | 35-40 | Insurmountable |

| Defense BonusAbility + Skill Point Increases = Bonus |

| Defense Score10 + Defense Bonus = Score |

| Evasion Score Formula10 + Agility = Evasion |

| Skill Roll FormulaD20 + Skill Bonus = Total |

| Base Skill Bonus FormulaRelevant Ability + Skill Value = Skill Bonus |

| Sub-Skill Bonus FormulaRelevant Sub-Skill Ability + Sub-Skill Value + Base Skill Value = Sub-Skill Bonus |

| Unproficient Skill Bonus Formula½ Relevant Ability or x 2 (if negative) = Unproficient Skill Bonus |

| Unproficient Sub-Skill Bonus FormulaRelevant Sub-Skill Ability + Base Skill Value = Sub-Skill Bonus |

| Bonus | Rarity | Energy |

| +0 | - | - |

| +1 | Common | 5-9 |

| +2 | - | 10-14 |

| +3 | Uncommon | 15-19 |

| +4 | - | 20-24 |

| +5 | Rare | 25-29 |

| +6 | - | 30-34 |

| +7 | Legendary | 35-39 |

| +8 | - | 40-44 |

| +9 | Mythic | 45-49 |

| +10 |  | 50-54 |

| +11 | Ascended | 55-59 |

| Four adventurers—Kadin, Isolde, Rhea, and Lyric—emerge from the dense jungle to find themselves at the edge of a raging river. The air is thick with mist from the thundering rapids below, and a precarious rope bridge stretches across, swaying with each gust of wind. Their goal lies on the other side, but the journey across promises to be as perilous as the river itself.Realm Master (Rita): After hours of travel through dense jungle, you arrive at the banks of a swift, raging river. A rope bridge stretches across, swaying precariously in the wind. Some of the planks are missing, and others creak ominously under the strain of the river’s spray. The goal is clear: the whole party needs to cross. However, this bridge might not hold up without some effort.Eli (playing Kadin): Kadin steps forward and inspects the bridge. He wants to test its integrity and figure out how we can cross safely.Nia (playing Isolde): Isolde sees Kadin’s hesitation and steps up. She’ll try to encourage everyone, keeping morale up to help us stay calm and focused.Rita: All right, this will be a Skill Encounter. To successfully cross the river, you’ll need 3 Successes as a group.Rita (to Eli): Kadin is inspecting the bridge. What Skill are you Rolling?Eli: I’ll roll Appraise. He’s looking for weak points or a way to secure the bridge better.Rita: Sounds good! The Difficulty Score (DS) for this encounter is 12, but Acuity Skills get a +1 Bonus. Go ahead.Eli (rolling a D20): I rolled a 15! With my Bonuses, that’s 19.Rita: That’s a success, and a solid one! Kadin identifies two key weak points in the bridge. With some quick adjustments or careful footwork, it should hold for the crossing. That’s two Successes.Rita (to Nia): Isolde, you’re keeping everyone motivated?Nia: Yes, I’ll use my Charisma to boost morale. I think Motivate applies here—reminding everyone we’ve faced worse!Rita: Motivate works, but this is a tricky situation. Let’s see how you do.Nia (rolling): Hmm, an 6. Even with my Bonus, it’s only 11.Rita: That’s a close miss. Isolde’s words are inspiring, but the roar of the river drowns her out a bit. That’s one Failure, reducing your Success count to one.Rita (to Alex, playing Rhea): Rhea, what’s your move?Alex: I’ll use Sleight of Hand to secure the bridge where Kadin pointed out the weak spots. I have some rope and tools in my kit to make it safer.Rita: Great! Sleight of Hand is especially effective here, you gain a +3 Bonus.Alex (rolling): Yes! A 12. With my Sleight of Hand Bonus, and that +3, it’s a 19.Rita: Another two Successes! With Rhea’s quick work reinforcing the bridge, it looks much sturdier. With teamwork and clever thinking, the party crosses the river safely. The bridge groans under the weight but holds strong. Beyond the river, the jungle stretches onward. Well done, everyone! |

| Action | AP | Summary |

| Basic Action | 2 | A versatile Action used for making attacks, using Powers, and performing Techniques. Most improvised Actions fall into this category. |

| Quick Action | 1 | A versatile Action like the Basic Action used for making attacks, using Powers, and performing Techniques with less AP cost. |

| Free Action | 0 | A versatile Action, similar to a Basic or Quick Action, used for making attacks, using Powers, and performing Techniques at no AP cost. However, each additional use of the Free Action in the same turn costs 1 AP each. |

| Movement | 1 | When you take this Action you can move up to your Speed. This movement can be split between other Actions. Spending 2 AP on movement in a round allows you to move up to double your Speed. A 3rd movement Action grants the ability to move an extra ½ of your Speed, and a 4th grants an additional ¼. You cannot take more than 4 Movement Actions in a round. |

| Interaction | 1 | Draw or sheath a weapon, ingest a liquid, apply a bandage, or perform similar item-related tasks. Interactions can also include Actions like pulling a lever, opening a door, or smashing a pot. If the task requires an Ability roll, you must also use the Ability Roll Action in tandem. It requires 1 AP to administer a non-enhanced consumable to another individual. |

| Ability Roll | 1 | Make a Skill or Defense roll for tasks such as searching the ground, pulling a heavy door, climbing a difficult wall, or Overcoming an effect or condition. |

| Skill Encounter Action | 2 | Contribute to a Skill Encounter by making a relevant Skill Roll. This Action may involve interacting with objects and making an Ability Roll, but it is not treated as an Ability Roll, Interaction, or Basic Action. The Skill Encounter Action represents focused effort toward overcoming an obstacle during a Combat Encounter, and can only be used for such. |

| Evade | 1 | Gain a +2 bonus to your Evasion against the next attack made against you before your next turn. Each additional use of Evade adds a +1 to this bonus. Alternatively, you may distribute these bonuses across multiple attacks in the next round, gaining a +2 bonus for each attack up to the number of times you used the Evade Action. You must decide how to allocate your bonuses—whether stacking them on a single attack, spreading them across multiple attacks, or a combination of both—before any attacker rolls. |

| Brace | 1 | Brace yourself against damage. The next time you take damage, reduce it by an amount equal to your Vitality (minimum of 1). If you take this Action multiple times, you gain an additional +1 damage reduction for each use. |

| Focus | 1 | Spend time preparing to Overcome a challenge. The next D20 Skill or Defense roll you make, or Score that is targeted, gains a +2 Bonus. You can take this Action multiple times, with each additional use increasing the Bonus by +1. This effect lasts until you use it or until the start of your next turn. This Action can only be used during Combat encounters. |

| Search | 1 | If a creature is hidden from you, roll Search to try to locate it. If, at any point during your turn, you come within 2 spaces of the hidden target and your Search roll meets or exceeds the target's Stealth or Hide score, you successfully locate it. |

| Overcome | 1 | Done as a 0 AP Action at the end of your turn, before gaining Action Points, roll each against each condition or effect targeting you using the relevant defense(s). Taking this action earlier in a turn costs 1 Action Point. |

| Successes | Energy Multiplier |

| -3 | x5 |

| -2 | x4 |

| -1 | x3 |

| +1 | x2 |

| +2 | x1.5 |

| +3 | x1 |

| Reaction | AP | Summary |

| Basic Reaction | 2 | Whenever something can be done as simply a “Reaction” it usually refers to the basic Reaction. Basic Reactions are commonly used for reactive Powers or Techniques, when Feats allow, and with some triggered effects. |

| Quick Reaction | 1 | Quick Reactions are commonly used for reactive Powers or Techniques, when Feats allow, and with some triggered effects. |

| Free Reaction | 0 | A versatile Reaction, similar to a Basic or Quick Reaction, used for making attacks, using Powers, and performing Techniques at no AP cost. However, each additional use of the Free Reaction on the same turn costs 1 AP. |

| Detect | 0 | When a hidden creature reveals themselves in a way you can reasonably perceive (e.g., hear or see them), even if they are no longer in the same location, you may take the Detect Reaction. Roll to Perceive against the creature’s Stealth or Hide score. If you meet or exceed the score, you learn the exact location of the creature, even if it is Obscured. Each additional use of this Reaction in the same round costs 1 AP. |

| Dodge | 1 | When targeted by an attack you could reasonably dodge, you may use the Dodge Reaction to gain +1 Evasion. This must be done before knowing whether the attack hits or misses. |

| Help Reaction | 1 | If an ally you can see or hear appears to, or signals, they need help with an Ability or Skill roll during battle, you can assist by rolling your help die and adding it to their D20 roll. Your assistance must be reasonable for the situation and match your Character's abilities. Additionally, you may spend 1 additional AP to help with tasks requiring an Interaction. |

| Size | Height | Spaces Occupied | Carrying Capacity | Min. Carrying Capacity |

| Miniscule | Under 1 ft | 1/8 | 10 kg + 5 kg x Strength | 5 kgs |

| Tiny | 1 - 2 ft | 1/4 | 25 kg + 10 kg x Strength | 10 kgs |

| Small | 2 - 4 ft | 1 | 50 kg + 25 kg x Strength | 25 kgs |

| Medium | 5 - 7 ft | 1 | 100 kg + 50 kg x Strength | 50 kgs |

| Large | 7 - 10 ft | 1-2 | 200 kg + 100 kg x Strength | 100 kgs |

| Huge | 10 - 15 | 4 | 400 kg + 200 kg x Strength | 200 kgs |

| Humongous | 15 - 25 | 9 | 800 kg + 400 kg x Strength | 400 kgs |

| Gargantuan | 25+ | 16+ | 1600 kg x 800 kg x Strength | 800 kgs |

| Weapon Attack Roll FormulaD20 + Martial Bonus = Weapon Attack Roll |

| Martial Bonus FormulaRelevant Ability + Martial Proficiency = Martial Bonus |

| Martial Potency FormulaMartial Bonus + 10 = Potency |

| Attack Types | Ability |

| Melee Weapon | Strength |

| Ranged Weapon | Acuity |

| Unarmed Prowess | Strength or Agility (if proficient) |

| Finesse Weapon | Agility |

| Thrown Weapon | Strength |

| Power Attack Roll FormulaD20 + Power Bonus = Power Attack Roll |

| Power Bonus FormulaPower Ability + Power Proficiency = Power Bonus |

| Power Potency FormulaPower Bonus + 10 = Potency |

| Nia (playing Isolde): Isolde is hit hard and falls to the ground, her HP dropping to -8.Rita (DM): On your turn, roll 1d4 to see how much more damage you take.Nia: (Rolls 1d4 and gets a 2) Isolde's HP drops to -10.Eli (playing Kadin): I rush over and use Medicine to stabilize her.Rita: Roll Medicine.Eli: 15. That should work, right?Rita: That puts Isolde at -9 HP. The healing you’ve received stabilizes Isolde!Nia: Thank the gods! Isolde’s still alive. |

| Write This Down...Now that you've chosen your Archetype and Archetype Ability, go to your Character sheet and fill in the Martial and/or Power symbol next to that Ability. You may also want to note the name and description of your Archetype in Character details, though you may choose to do this later when you’ve built out your Character more. |

| Write This Down...You may wish to change the name of “Energy” to better match your Character’s flavor. Simply use the Custom Character Sheet PDF or change the name in your Digital Sheet. Despite the name being different, rules that refer to “Energy” still refer to this resource. |

| Write This Down...Write down your chosen Size, Height, Weight, Age, and Languages in the Character details section. Add your proficient Skills to your Skill list and mark them with “Prof.” Refer to “Skills” in Chapter 1 for Skill Bonus calculations, and record the bonus in the Bonus field. |

| Write This Down...Write the name of your Species, along with the names, descriptions, and any uses of your Ancestry Traits, Species Traits, Characteristics, and Flaws (if any), in the “Species & Ancestry Traits” section of your Character sheet.You can choose and write your Character’s name, then write their description, personality, and potential backstory in the Character details section. This can be done at any time. |

| Write This Down...Now that you’ve determined your Ability values, assign each one to the corresponding Ability on your Character sheet. Be sure to consider where you want your highest value—typically, this will be assigned to your Power Ability or Martial Ability, depending on your Character's focus. |

| Player TipVitality is an important Ability! It directly impacts your Character’s health, so be sure to consider that when assigning your Abilities. |

| Player TipYou increase your Archetype Proficiency by 1 every 5 levels, so feel free to divide the points however you wish—you get more! But don’t spread yourself too thin. If you rely heavily on Martial or Power performance, don’t skimp on that Proficiency! |

| Write This Down...Record the values you’ve assigned to your Martial and Power Proficiencies on your Character sheet. If either of these values is zero, you can simply leave that section blank. |

| Player TipYou will gain one additional Archetype Feat or Innate Pool (With a +1 to Innate Threshold) every 3 levels, starting at level 4! |

| Write This Down...Record your current Armament Proficiency, Innate Energy, and Innate Threshold on your Character Sheet. You don’t need to choose your additional Archetype Feats or Innate Powers right now, but be sure to remember that you can select them when you update your sheet with these details later. |

| Write This Down...Write down every Skill you want on your Character sheet, regardless of proficiency. This makes it easy to reference common Skills and their associated Bonuses.Be sure to mark the Skills you gain from your Species and this step as proficient and calculate your Skill Bonuses accurately based on the Skill Points you’ve allocated, whether they’re proficient, and the rules outlined in Chapter 1. |

| Player TipSince the lists are quite extensive, it’s a good idea to narrow your choices down to 3-5 Feats, pick your favorite(s), and remember the others for future levels. |

| Write This Down...Write down the name of each Feat (a custom name that reflects how the Feat works for your Character is recommended!), its description (shortened or simplified if desired), the number of uses (both current and maximum, if applicable), and the Recovery Time to regain those uses (FR or PR). |

| Player TipDon’t feel pressured to take more complex Feats, like State Feats, just because they’re part of the game. Focus first on creating a Character that you’ll enjoy playing! You can always pick different Feats when you’re more comfortable. |

| Player TipYou may find that you want to adjust your Health and Energy totals before finalizing your Character, especially after creating Powers and Techniques. This is not a problem—feel free to modify these numbers as needed before your first session with your Character. |

| Write This Down...Health and Energy should be recorded with both a current and maximum value in a way that allows easy adjustments to the current value. Record your Terminal value, and remember to update it as you level. |

| Player TipIf your Vitality is negative, don’t worry! You only apply negative Vitality values to your Health once at level one, and not again during leveling. |

| Armament Proficiency | Martial Proficiency |

| 3 | 0 |

| 8 | 1 |

| 12 | 2 |

| 15 | 3 |

| 18 | 4 |

| 21 | 5 |

| 24 | 6 |

| Write This Down...When adding equipment to your Character sheet, ensure all relevant details are properly recorded. For weapons, note the total TP cost, range, damage type, damage dice, and weapon properties. For armor, record the total TP cost, damage reduction, and any other properties.As you acquire Armament Proficiencies, make sure to list them in the Armament Proficiency section of your Character sheet. Additionally, reduce your current Training Points by the appropriate amount to account for the cost of these proficiencies. |

| Write This Down...When adding Powers and Techniques, record all relevant details, including the property proficiencies required/gained, Energy cost, range, damage type, and dice (if applicable), target defense(s), and other properties. List Innate Powers on the main page of your Character sheet for easy access, while other Powers and Techniques go in the Powers & Techniques section. Deduct the corresponding Training Points from the gained Power & Technique Part proficiencies from your TP total.As you acquire Technique & Power Part Proficiencies, note them in the Proficiency section. |

| Level | Experience | Level | Experience |

| 1 | 4 | 11 | 44 |

| 2 | 8 | 12 | 48 |

| 3 | 12 | 13 | 52 |

| 4 | 16 | 14 | 56 |

| 5 | 20 | 15 | 60 |

| 6 | 24 | 16 | 64 |

| 7 | 28 | 17 | 68 |

| 8 | 32 | 18 | 72 |

| 9 | 36 | 19 | 76 |

| 10 | 40 | 20 | 80 |

| Ave. Difficulty Score10 + ½ Party Level = Ave Difficulty ScoreNumber of SuccessesNumber of Participating Characters + 1 = Number of Successes Required |

| Awarded ExperienceParty’s Ave. Level x # of Characters = Total XPDS Experience AdjustmentTotal XP × (1 + 0.25 × (DS Difference ÷ 2)) = Adjusted Total XP |

| Ave. Combat DifficultyNumber of Enemies = Number of AlliesAve. Level of Enemies = Ave. Level of Allies |

| Awarded ExperienceThe sum of Enemy Levels x 2 = Total XP |

| Level | Ability Points | Training Points | Health-Energy Points | Archetype Proficiency |

| 1 | 7 | 22 + AA | 18 | 2 |

| 2 | 7 | 24 + AA x Lvl | 30 | 2 |

| 3 | 8 | 26 + AA x Lvl | 42 | 2 |

| 4 | 8 | 28 + AA x Lvl | 54 | 2 |

| 5 | 8 | 30 + AA x Lvl | 66 | 3 |

| 6 | 9 | 32 + AA x Lvl | 78 | 3 |

| 7 | 9 | 34 + AA x Lvl | 90 | 3 |

| 8 | 9 | 36 + AA x Lvl | 102 | 3 |

| 9 | 10 | 38 + AA x Lvl | 114 | 3 |

| 10 | 10 | 40 + AA x Lvl | 126 | 4 |

| 11 | 10 | 42 + AA x Lvl | 138 | 4 |

| 12 | 11 | 44 + AA x Lvl | 150 | 4 |

| 13 | 11 | 46 + AA x Lvl | 162 | 4 |

| 14 | 11 | 48 + AA x Lvl | 174 | 4 |

| 15 | 12 | 50 + AA x Lvl | 186 | 5 |

| 16 | 12 | 52 + AA x Lvl | 198 | 5 |

| 17 | 12 | 54 + AA x Lvl | 210 | 5 |

| 18 | 13 | 56 + AA x Lvl | 222 | 5 |

| 19 | 13 | 58 + AA x Lvl | 234 | 5 |

| 20 | 13 | 60 + AA x Lvl | 246 | 6 |

| Level | Innate Threshold | Innate Energy | Innate Pools | Power Proficiency |

| 1 | 8 | 16 | 2 | 2 |

| 2 | 8 | 16 | 2 | 2 |

| 3 | 8 | 16 | 2 | 2 |

| 4 | 9 | 27 | 3 | 2 |

| 5 | 9 | 27 | 3 | 3 |

| 6 | 9 | 27 | 3 | 3 |

| 7 | 10 | 40 | 4 | 3 |

| 8 | 10 | 40 | 4 | 3 |

| 9 | 10 | 40 | 4 | 3 |

| 10 | 11 | 55 | 5 | 4 |

| 11 | 11 | 55 | 5 | 4 |

| 12 | 11 | 55 | 5 | 4 |

| 13 | 12 | 72 | 6 | 4 |

| 14 | 12 | 72 | 6 | 4 |

| 15 | 12 | 72 | 6 | 5 |

| 16 | 13 | 91 | 7 | 5 |

| 17 | 13 | 91 | 7 | 5 |

| 18 | 13 | 91 | 7 | 5 |

| 19 | 14 | 112 | 8 | 5 |

| 20 | 14 | 112 | 8 | 6 |

| Level | Bonus Archetype Feats | Total Archetype Feats | Armament Proficiency | Martial Proficiency |

| 1 | +2 | 3 | 12 | 2 |

| 2 | - | 4 | 12 | 2 |

| 3 | - | 5 | 12 | 2 |

| 4 | +1 | 7 | 12 | 2 |

| 5 | - | 8 | 15 | 3 |

| 6 | - | 9 | 15 | 3 |

| 7 | +1 | 11 | 15 | 3 |

| 8 | - | 12 | 15 | 3 |

| 9 | - | 13 | 15 | 3 |

| 10 | +1 | 15 | 18 | 4 |

| 11 | - | 16 | 18 | 4 |

| 12 | - | 17 | 18 | 4 |

| 13 | +1 | 19 | 18 | 4 |

| 14 | - | 20 | 18 | 4 |

| 15 | - | 21 | 21 | 5 |

| 16 | +1 | 23 | 21 | 5 |

| 17 | - | 24 | 21 | 5 |

| 18 | - | 25 | 21 | 5 |

| 19 | +1 | 27 | 21 | 5 |

| 20 | - | 28 | 24 | 6 |

| Level | Increase Innate Power or  Additional Feat | Increase Archetype Proficiency |

| 1 | - | - |

| 2 | - | - |

| 3 | - | - |

| 4 | +1 | - |

| 5 | - | +1 |

| 6 | - | - |

| 7 | +1 | - |

| 8 | - | - |

| 9 | - | - |

| 10 | +1 | +1 |

| 11 | - | - |

| 12 | - | - |

| 13 | +1 | - |

| 14 | - | - |

| 15 | - | +1 |

| 16 | +1 | - |

| 17 | - | - |

| 18 | - | - |

| 19 | +1 | - |

| 20 | - | +1 |

| 1d8 | Species |

| 1 | Human |

| 2 | Elf |

| 3 | Dwarf |

| 4 | Orc |

| 5 | Dragonborn |

| 6 | Halfling |

| 7 | Mixed |

| 8 | Re-Roll |

| 1d4 | Martial or Power Archetype |

| 1 | Martial Archetype |

| 2 | Power Archetype |

| 3 | Mixed Archetype |

| 4 | Re-Roll |

| 1d20 | Archetype | Summary |

| 1 | Bruiser | A powerhouse who relies on brute strength to dominate with crushing blows. |

| 2 | Martial Artist | A disciplined fighter who masters unarmed Combat with precision and fluidity. |

| 3 | Swashbuckler | A flamboyant duelist who combines agility, wit, and flair in Combat. |

| 4 | Assassin | A stealthy and precise Combatant who specializes in stealth and lethal strikes. |

| 5 | Archer | A ranged specialist with a variety of ranged Techniques and attacks. |

| 6 | Juggernaut | A heavily armored warrior who charges fearlessly into battle unyielding. |

| 7 | Skirmisher | A nimble combatant excelling in hit-and-run tactics and battlefield mobility. |

| 8 | Beast Master | A warrior who fights alongside loyal beasts, forming a symbiotic battle team. |

| 9 | Spearman | A polearm expert who uses reach and precision to keep enemies at bay. |

| 10 | Acrobat | A highly agile fighter who uses flips, rolls, and aerial maneuvers in Combat. |

| 11 | Barbarian | A wild and primal warrior fueled by rage, capable of incredible Feats of strength. |

| 12 | Wrestler | A close-quarters specialist who uses grapples, holds, and throws to disable foes. |

| 13 | Sentinel | A stalwart defender who protects allies and holds the line against attackers. |

| 14 | Gladiator | A versatile and showy fighter trained to excel in arena-style Combat. |

| 15 | Arcstriker | A combatant who specializes in long-range thrown weaponry. |

| 16 | Tactician | A strategic warrior who controls the battlefield with clever positioning and disability maneuvers. |

| 17 | Pacifier | A non-lethal fighter who disables or neutralizes opponents without killing them. |

| 18 | Cavalier | A mounted warrior who combines speed and power to dominate the battlefield. |

| 19 | Knife-Thrower | A specialist in throwing weapons with pinpoint accuracy and relentless speed. |

| 20 | Weapon Master | A versatile combatant skilled with a wide variety of weapons, excelling in adaptability. |

| 1d6 - 1d10 | Ability |

| 1-2 | Strength |

| 3-4 | Vitality |

| 4-5 | Agility |

| 6-7 | Acuity |

| 8 | Intelligence |

| 9 | Charisma |

| 10 | Re-Roll |

| 1d20 | Archetype | Summary |

| 1 | Wizard | A master of arcane knowledge who casts powerful versatile spells. |

| 2 | Warlock | A spellcaster who gains power from pacts with otherworldly entities. |

| 3 | Sorcerer | A natural-born magic user who channels raw, innate power. |

| 4 | Cleric | A divine servant who heals, protects, and smites with holy magic. |

| 5 | Necromancer | A wielder of death who commands undead and manipulates life forces. |

| 6 | Illusionist | A master of deception who manipulates perception and confounds enemies. |

| 7 | Summoner | A conjurer who calls creatures from other realms to fight by their side. |

| 8 | Enchanter | A manipulator of minds, using charm and domination to control others. |

| 9 | Artificer | A creator of magical constructs and enchanted items for combat and utility. |

| 10 | Elementalist | A caster who controls the primal forces of nature: fire, water, earth, and air. |

| 11 | Shaman | A wild and primal warrior fueled by rage, capable of incredible Feats of strength. |

| 12 | Psion | A spiritual leader who summons spirits and commands primal forces. |

| 13 | Druid | A protector of nature who shapeshifts and commands the forces of the wild. |

| 14 | Bard | A charismatic performer who weaves magic through music and stories. |

| 15 | Hexblade | A wielder of cursed weapons, channeling dark powers through a sentient blade. |

| 16 | Conjurer | A summoner of creatures and objects from other planes for aid in battle. |

| 17 | Witch | A practitioner of ancient magic who uses potions, curses, and rituals. |

| 18 | Diviner | A seer who uses magic to glimpse the future and uncover hidden truths. |

| 19 | Chronomancer | A manipulator of time who slows, speeds, and even rewinds events. |

| 20 | Blood Mage | A spellcaster who uses their own life force or blood to fuel powerful magic. |

| 1d6 - 1d10 | Ability |

| 1-2 | Acuity |

| 3-4 | Intelligence |

| 5-6 | Charisma |

| 7 | Strength |

| 8 | Vitality |

| 9 | Agility |

| 10 | Re-Roll |

| 1d10 | Flavor | Description |

| 1 | Artistic Creation | Powers shaped through visual art, such as painting, sculpture, or origami. |

| 2 | Nature's Essence | Abilities derived from plants, animals, or the natural world, channeling earth, flora, or flora. |

| 3 | Celestial Energy | Magic tied to the stars, moon, or divine cosmic forces, influencing fate and time. |

| 4 | Sound | Powers that manipulate vibrations and sound waves, from sonic blasts to sonic healing. |

| 5 | Emotion | Magic drawn from emotional states, affecting moods, manipulating feelings, or amplifying traits. |

| 6 | Mechanical | Powers that use technology, gears, or machinery to create constructs, defenses, or attacks. |

| 7 | Dreams | Abilities drawn from the realm of dreams, influencing minds, illusions, and reality. |

| 8 | Blood & Flesh | Magic tied to life forces, blood manipulation, and body transformations or enhancements. |

| 9 | Memory | Powers focused on manipulating memories, creating illusions, or altering perceptions of time. |

| 10 | Chaos | Magic rooted in unpredictability, randomness, or entropy, creating wild and uncontrollable effects. |

| Write This Down...Take note on your Character sheet of each property and damage type and amount that you gain proficiency with by notating the individual TP cost of those things in your “Armament Proficiencies” list. |

| Level | Damage |

| 1 | Ability |

| 4 | 1d2 + Ability |

| 8 | 1d4 + Ability |

| 12 | 1d6 + Ability |

| 16 | 1d8 + Ability |

| 20 | 1d10 + Ability |

| Currency Cost | Rarity | Difficulty Score | Successes | Time |

| 0-99 | Common | 14 | 1 | 8 hours |

| 100-499 | Uncommon | 16 | 1 | 5 Days |

| 500-1,499 | Rare | 18 | 2 | 10 Days |

| 1,500-2,499 | Epic | 20 | 4 | 20 Days |

| 2,500-4,999 | Epic | 22 | 5 | 25 Days |

| 5,000-9,999 | Epic | 24 | 6 | 30 Days |

| 10,000-19,999 | Legendary | 26 | 7 | 35 Days |

| 20,000-34,999 | Legendary | 28 | 8 | 40 Days |

| 35,000-49,999 | Legendary | 30 | 9 | 45 Days |

| 50,000-64,999 | Mythic | 32 | 10 | 50 Days |

| 65,000-79,999 | Mythic | 34 | 11 | 55 Days |

| 80,000-99,999 | Mythic | 36 | 12 | 60 Days |

| 100,000+ | Ascended | 38 | 14 | 70 Days |

| Successes | Below (Failure) | Above (Success) |

| Meet Req. # of Successes | — | Create a fully functional item worth market price with no complications. |

| +/- 1 | The item is worth 75% of the market price. | The item is worth 125% of the market price. |

| +/- 2 | The item is worth 50% of the market price. | You retain 25% of the crafting materials you would’ve spent and the item is worth 125% of the market price. |

| +/- 3 | The item is worth 25% of the market price. | You retain 50% of the crafting materials you would’ve spent and the item is worth 125% of the market price instead. |

| +/- 4 | The item is worthless and doesn’t function as intended. | You retain 50% of the crafting materials you would’ve spent and the item is worth 150% of the market price instead. |

| +/- 5 | — | You retain 75% of the crafting materials you would’ve spent and the item is worth 150% of the market price instead. |

| +/- 6 | — | You retain 75% of the crafting materials you would’ve spent and the item is worth 175% of the market price instead. |

| +/- 7 | — | You retain 75% of the crafting materials you would have used and can choose either to craft an additional identical item, both valued at 100% of the market price or to enhance the original item, increasing its value to 200% of the market price. |

| +/- 8+ | — | In addition to the previous effect, you gain one additional item worth 100% of the cost for each success above 7 over the required successes. |

| Write This Down...Make sure you record any power parts that you are proficient in, including the parts level increases, if any, within your proficiencies, so you don’t forget them! |

| Rarity | Currency Per Energy | Energy | Difficulty Score | Successes | Time |

| Common | 10 | 0-10 | 14 | 1 | 8 hours |

| Uncommon | 25 | 11-20 | 16 | 1 | 5 Days |

| Rare | 50 | 21-30 | 18 | 2 | 10 Days |

| Epic | 71 | 31-35 | 20 | 4 | 20 Days |

| Epic | 125 | 36-40 | 22 | 5 | 25 Days |

| Epic | 222 | 41-45 | 24 | 6 | 30 Days |

| Legendary | 363 | 46-55 | 26 | 7 | 35 Days |

| Legendary | 583 | 56-60 | 28 | 8 | 40 Days |

| Legendary | 692 | 61-65 | 30 | 9 | 45 Days |

| Mythic | 866 | 66-75 | 32 | 10 | 50 Days |

| Mythic | 1,000 | 76-80 | 34 | 11 | 55 Days |

| Mythic | 1,176 | 81-85 | 36 | 12 | 60 Days |

| Ascended | 1,300 | 86+ | 38 | 14 | 70 Days |

| Partial Recovery | Full Recovery | Adjusted Energy |

| X | 1 | 100% |

| X | 2 | 125% |

| 1 | 3 | 150% |

| 2 | 4 | 175% |

| 3 | 6 | 200% |

| 4 | 8 | 225% |

| 5 | 10 | 250% |

| Permanent/Passive | Permanent/Passive | 300% |

| Rarity | Cost Per Energy | Energy | Difficulty Score | Successes | Time |

| Common | 5 | 0-10 | 14 | 1 | 2 hours |

| Common | 5 | 11-20 | 15 | 1 | 4 hours |

| Uncommon | 12 | 21-40 | 16 | 1 | 1 Day |

| Rare | 24 | 41-60 | 18 | 1 | 2 Days |

| Epic | 34 | 61-70 | 20 | 1 | 5 Days |

| Epic | 62 | 71-80 | 22 | 2 | 10 Days |

| Epic | 110 | 81-90 | 24 | 3 | 15 Days |

| Legendary | 180 | 91-110 | 26 | 4 | 20 Days |

| Legendary | 290 | 111-120 | 28 | 5 | 25 Days |

| Legendary | 384 | 121-130 | 30 | 6 | 30 Days |

| Mythic | 432 | 131-150 | 32 | 7 | 35 Days |

| Mythic | 500 | 151-160 | 34 | 8 | 40 Days |

| Mythic | 588 | 161-170 | 36 | 9 | 45 Days |

| Ascended | 650 | 171+ | 38 | 10 | 50 Days |

| Rarity | Maximum Currency | Currency Per Success | Difficulty Score |

| Common | 100 | 20 | 14 |

| Uncommon | 500 | 100 | 16 |

| Rare | 1,500 | 300 | 18 |

| Epic | 10,000 | 2,000 | 24 |

| Legendary | 50,000 | 10,000 | 30 |

| Mythic | 100,000 | 20,000 | 36 |

| Ascended | Unlimited | 50,000 | 38 |

| Creature Level | Rarity | Maximum Currency | Currency Per Success | Difficulty Score |

| 1/4 | Common | 25 | 5 | 11 |

| 1/2 | Common | 50 | 10 | 12 |

| 3/4 | Common | 75 | 15 | 13 |

| 1 | Common | 100 | 20 | 14 |

| 2 | Uncommon | 200 | 40 | 15 |

| 3 | Uncommon | 350 | 70 | 16 |

| 4 | Uncommon | 500 | 100 | 17 |

| 5 | Rare | 750 | 150 | 18 |

| 6 | Rare | 1,500 | 300 | 19 |

| 7 | Epic | 2,500 | 500 | 20 |

| 8 | Epic | 3,500 | 700 | 21 |

| 9 | Epic | 5,000 | 1,000 | 22 |

| 10 | Epic | 8,000 | 1,600 | 23 |

| 11 | Epic | 10,000 | 2,000 | 24 |

| 12 | Legendary | 15,000 | 3,000 | 25 |

| 13 | Legendary | 20,000 | 4,000 | 26 |

| 14 | Legendary | 25,000 | 5,000 | 27 |

| 15 | Legendary | 30,000 | 6,000 | 28 |

| 16 | Legendary | 40,000 | 8,000 | 29 |

| 17 | Legendary | 50,000 | 10,000 | 30 |

| 18 | Mythic | 55,000 | 11,000 | 31 |

| 19 | Mythic | 65,000 | 13,000 | 32 |

| 20 | Mythic | 70,000 | 14,000 | 33 |

| Worth of Flora | Rarity of Flora | Currency Per Success | Difficulty Score |

| 0-99 | Common | 5 | 14 |

| 100-499 | Uncommon | 25 | 16 |

| 500-1,499 | Rare | 75 | 18 |

| 1,500-9,999 | Epic | 500 | 24 |

| 10,000-49,999 | Legendary | 2,500 | 30 |

| 50,000-99,999 | Mythic | 5,000 | 36 |

| 100,000+ | Ascended | 10,000 | 38 |

| Abundance | Bonus/Penalty |

| Desolate | -8 |

| Infertile | -6 |

| Sparse | -4 |

| Meager | -2 |

| Moderate | +0 |

| Flourishing | +2 |

| Abundant | +4 |

| Bountiful | +6 |

| Verdant | +8 |

| Teeming | +10 |

| Rarity | Crafting Bonus |

| Common | 0 |

| Uncommon | +1 |

| Rare | +2 |

| Epic | +3 |

| Legendary | +4 |

| Mythic | +5 |

| Ascended | +6 |

| Creature Level | Currency | Time (Days) | Difficulty Score | Successes |

| 1/4 | 50c | 2 | 11 | 1 |

| 1/2 | 100c | 3 | 11 | 1 |

| 3/4 | 150c | 4 | 12 | 1 |

| 1 | 200c | 5 | 12 | 1 |

| 2 | 400c | 10 | 14 | 4 |

| 3 | 700c | 15 | 16 | 6 |

| 4 | 1,000c | 20 | 18 | 8 |

| 5 | 1,500c | 25 | 20 | 10 |

| 6 | 3,000c | 30 | 22 | 12 |

| 7 | 5,000c | 35 | 24 | 14 |

| 8 | 7,000c | 40 | 26 | 16 |

| 9 | 10,000c | 45 | 28 | 18 |

| 10 | 16,000c | 50 | 30 | 20 |

| Player TipHaving too many Companions can be a hindrance to a party. Remember that only two can participate in Skill Encounters, and that the more Commanding that occurs during Combat, the fewer Action Points each companion has! |

| Skill Points | Training Points | Currency | Time (Days) | Difficulty Score | Successes |

| 1 | 6 | 450c | 15 | 16 | 6 |

| 2 | 12 | 900c | 30 | 22 | 12 |

| Bonus | Required Successes |

| +0% | 3 |

| +20% | 4 |

| +40% | 5 |

| +60% | 6 |

| Currency Bonus | DS |

| +0c | 10 |

| +50c | 12 |

| +100c | 14 |

| +150c | 16 |

| Skills | Possible Uses |

| Stealth (Hide) | Use your skills to move quietly through places you aren’t allowed. |

| Sleight of Hand (Lockpick) | Use your expertise and tools to get into a locked place |

| Sleight of Hand (Pickpocket) | Use quick moves and misdirection to steal or plant items |

| Climb | Bypass protections through second-story work |

| Acting / Deceive | Lie to gain social advantage or to enter restricted areas |

| Charm / Persuade | Talk you way into restricted areas and out of tight corners |

| Persuade (Haggle) | Sell fake goods at outrageous prices |

| Forgery | Craft false documents to intimidate people or falsify your identity |

| Bonus | Time | Money | Connections |

| +1 | 1 Day | 25c | - |

| +2 | 2 Days | 50c | 20% Cut |

| +3 | 3 Days | 75c | - |

| +4 | 4 Days | 100c | 40% Cut |

| Attack Roll DS | Winners’ Cut |

| 12 | 50c |

| 13 | 75c |

| 14 | 100c |

| … | … |

| Performance DS | Betting Pool |

| 12 | 2d4 x 5 C |

| 13 | 3d4 x 5 C |

| 14 | 4d4 x 5 C |

| … | … |

| Popularity Rank | Winners’ Cut | Betting Pool |

| 5 | +10% | +1 Multiplier |

| 10 | +20% | +2 Multiplier |

| 15 | +30% | +3 Multiplier |

| 20 | +40% | +4 Multiplier |

| … | … | … |

| Sucesses | Currency Gained |

| 3 | 25c |

| 4 | 50c |

| 5 | 75c |

| Premises | C Maximum | Staffing Max | Staffing Min | Initial Cost | DS |

| Market Stall | 50c/week | 1 | 0 | 100c | 15 |

| Outlet | 100c/week | 3 | 1 | 500c | 20 |

| Small Building | 200c/week | 10 | 5 | 1,000c | 25 |

| Large Building | 500c/week | 30 | 20 | 2,000c | 30 |

| Buying Goods/Equipment | Hiring Staff | Rarity/Difficulty |

| 50c | +10% | Common |

| 150c | +30% | Uncommon |

| 250c | +50% | Rare |

| DS | Station | Skill |

| 10 | Urchin | Workman |

| 12 | Workman | Apprentice |

| 14 | Merchant | Journeyman |

| 16 | Noble | Master |

| Profession/Station | Reward |

| Librarian | +2 bonus to Study downtime in this town, or a piece of lore related to your campaign |

| Smith | Access to a smithy and smith’s tools, or +2 to haggling or appraise when shopping for worked metal. |

| Criminal | Access to the criminal underground of the town (if any), or +2 to Crime downtime checks. |

| Noble | Access to high society, or some of their resources. |

| Merchant | +2 to Haggling skill checks related to the merchant’s wares, or the name of a person or location where you can purchase a specific item. |

| Location | Popularity | DS | Reward |

| Street Corner | 0 | 10 | 2d4 x 10c |

| Tavern/Amphitheater | 5 | 12 | 4d4 x 10c |

| Playhouse/Opera | 10 | 14 | 6d4 x 10c |

| … | +5 | +2 | +2d4c |

| Target | DS | Successes | Time | Reward |

| Basic Merchant | 12 | 3 | 1 Week | 150c |

| Wealthy Merchant | 14 | 3 | 1 Week | 250c |

| Minor Noble | 16 | 4 | 2 Weeks | 500c |

| Aristocrat | 18 | 5 | 3 Weeks | 1,000c |

| Royal | 20 | 6 | 4 Weeks | 5,000c + |

| Maximum Energy CostThe Energy cost of a Power cannot exceed (your Power Proficiency or half your Archetype Proficiency, whichever is higher) × 20. |